ANm?EiLdABOUT PROJECT MANAGEiIMENT

i

\~

\"Here\'s a management book which is just plain fun to read. The
Deadline is an innovative and entertaining story with insightful
business principles for team-based project management at the end -John
Sculley of each chapter.\"

\". . . it\'s a technological tour de force. It covers a wide range of
topics, from project estimating to metrics, from conflict resolution to
dealing with ambiguous specifications. . . . the bullet points alone are
worth the price of the book. . . . The Deadline is almost as funny as a
book full of Dilbert cartoons, but it\'s far less cynical. More
important, it contains some profound wisdom and some practical, positive
advice for improving the chances of meeting your next project deadline.
I highly recommend it.\" -Ed Yourdon, American Programmer

Also by TOM D-co Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, 2nd ed. by
Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister ISBN: 0-932633-43-9 Copyright 0 1998 256
pages, softcover Productive Teams: A Video featuring Tom DeMarco and
Timothy Lister ISBN: 0-932633-30-7 Copyright 0 1994 VHS or PAL

60 minutes

Software State-of-the-Art: Selected Papen edited by Tom DeMarco and
Timothy Lister ISBN: 0-932633-14-5 Copyright 0 1990 584 pages, hardcover
Why Does Software Cost So Much?And Other Puzzles o f the Information Age
by Tom DeMarco ISBN: 0-932633-34-X Copyright 0 1995 248 pages, softcover

Find O u t More About These and Other DH Books Contact us to request a
Book &Video Catalog and a free issue of The Dorset House Qtrarterl\~or
to codirm price and shipping information.

DORSET HOUSE PUBLISHING 353 West 12th Street New York, NY 10014 USA
1-800-342-6657 212-620-4053 fax: 212-727-1044 dhpubco@aol.com
www.dorsethouse.com

ANOVELABOUT PROJECT MANAGEMENT

TOM DeMARCO

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data DeMarco, Tom. The
deadline

:

a novel about project management

p\. cm. ISBN 0-932633-39-0 (softcover) 1. Industrial project
management\--Fiction. PS3554.E449D42 1997

813\'.54\--dc21

I.

/

Tom

DeMarco.

Title. 97- 24716 CIP

This novel is a work of fiction. Any references to historical events; to
real people, living or dead; or to real locales are intended only to
give the fiction a setting in historic reality. Other names, characters,
places, and incidents either are the product of the author\'s
imagination or are used fictitiously, and their resemblance, if any, to
real-life counterparts is entirely coincidental. Trademark credits: All
trade and product names are either trademarks, registered trademarks, or
service marks of their respective companies, and are the property of
their respective holders and should be treated as such. Cover Design:
David McClintock Cover Illustration: Tom DeMarco Cover Photograph: Hein
van Steenis Copyright O 1997 by Tom DeMarco. Published by Dorset House
Publishing, 353 West 12th Street, NewYork, NY 10014.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without prior written permission of the publisher. Distributed in the
English language in Singapore, the Philippines, and Southeast Asia by
Toppan Co., Ltd., Singapore; in the English language in India,
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, and Mauritius by Prism Books Pvt., Ltd.,
Bangalore, India; and in the English language in Japan by Toppan Co.,
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan. Printed in the United States ofAmerica Library of
Congress Catalog Number: 97-24716 ISBN: 0-932633-39-0

24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15

Preface vii 1 Opportunity Knocking 1 2 Standing Up to Kalbhss 11 3 4

SilikonValejit 17

The CD-ROM Plant 2 7

5 - NNL 36 6

The World\'s Greatest Project Manager 47 7 8

Taking On Staff 60

The Eminent Dr. Rizzoli 7 1 9 Ex-General Markov 84

10 Abdul Jamid 95 11 The Sinister Minister Belok

12 The Numbers Man

133

116

CONTENTS

13 14

Quickerstill

.

17

181

. Planning for the Summer Games The Guru of Conflict Resolution 18

Maestro Diyeniar Interlude

19

21 22

200 217

227

239

. Part and Whole

247

20 Standing on Ceremony

.

163

Morovia\'s First Programmer 15 Think Fast!

16

151

Endgame Begins

261

276

Theyear\'s Hottest IPO

289

23 Passing Through Riga on the Way Home

300

D u r i n g the 19309s,the University of Colorado physicist George
Gamow began writing a series of short stories about a certain Mr.
Tompkins, a middle-aged bank clerk. Mr. Tompkins, the stories related,
was interested in modern science. He would trundle off to evening
lectures put on by a local university physics professor, and inevitably
fall asleep partway through. When he awoke, he would find himself in
some alternate universe where one or another of the basic physical
constants was strikingly changed. In one of these stories, for example,
Mr.T. awoke in a universe where the speed of light was only fifteen
miles per hour. That meant he could observe relativistic effects on his
bicycle: The city blocks became shorter in the direction of travel as he
accelerated, and time on the post office clock slowed down. In another
story, Mr. Tompkins visited a world where Planck\'s Constant was 1.0,
and there he could see quantum mechanics in action on a billiard table:
The billiard balls refbsed to move smoothly across the table, but took
up quantum positions in probabilistic fashion.

vii

When I first came across the Gamow stories, I was just a teenager. Like
Mr. Tompkins, I too had an interest in modern science. I had already
read numerous descriptions of relativity and quantum mechanics, but it
was only when I read Mr. Tompkins in Wonderland that I began to develop
a visceral sense of what these matters were all about. I have always
admired Gamow\'s ingenious pedagogical device. It occurred to me that a
similar device might be used to demonstrate some of the principles of
project management. All I\'d have to do is portray a veteran project
manager sent off to some Wonderland where various of the rules governing
project work could be instructively altered. Thus was born, with
apologies to George Gamow, the idea of The Deadline, the story of a
manager named Tompkins and his remarkable experiences running software
projects in the ex-Soviet Republic of Morovia.

May 1997 Camden, Maine

\...

Vlll

T.D.M.

ANOWLABOUT PROJECT MANAGEMENT

DEDICATION

To Sally-Oh

M

r\. Tompkins took his seat in the very last row of Baldrige-One, the
main auditorium at the Big Telephone and Telecommunications Company\'s
Penelope, New Jersey, facility. He\'d spent a lot of time in this
auditorium during the past few weeks, attending out-placement lectures.
Mr. T., along with a few thousand other professional and middle
management employees, was being given the boot. Oh, that wasn\'t the
term they used. They preferred to call it \"made redundant\" or
\"downsized\" or \"right-sized\" or \"streamlined\" or \"managed down\"
or, best of all, \"Released to Seek Opportunities Elsewhere.\" They\'d
even made an acronym out of that one: ReSOE. Tompkins was a ReSOE.
Today\'s event was yet another in the series called \"Opportunity
Knocking.\" This five-week program, according to the posted notice, was
to be \"more than 100 hours of inspirational training, skits, musical
interludes, and celebration of ReSOE status.\" The still-employed Human
Resources people who put on the various sessions seemed pretty convinced
that ReSOE was a blessing in disguise. They made it clear that they
would

have dearly loved to be ReSOEs themselves. They really would. But no
such luck. No sir, they would just have to soldier on, bearing the
burdens of salary and benefits as best they could. Up on the stage now,
they were trying to put on a brave fiont. The last few rows of the
auditorium were in what the acoustic engineers called a \"null area.\"
For some reason (no one had even a good theory about this), almost no
sound fiom the stage could be heard in these rows. It made it a perfect
place for a snooze. Tompkins always sat here. He put down today\'s ton
of handouts on the seat in fiont of him. Two fat loose-leaf notebooks
and the usual assortment of favors were packed into a new canvas bag
with its printed logo: \"Our Company Is Thinning Down So the Rest of the
World Can Fatten Up.\" At the top of the bag was a baseball cap
embroidered \"ReSOE and Proud of It!\" Tompkins put the hat on, pulled
it down over his face and, within a few minutes, drifted off to sleep. A
long chorus line of H R people on the stage was singing \"Opportunity
Knocking: Okay!\" The audience was supposed to clap the rhythm and join
in at the chorus, shouting out \"Okay!\" as loud as they could. At the
left side of the stage was a man with a megaphone, exhorting the
audience with cries of \"Louder! Louder!\" A few people in the crowd
were clapping softly, but no one was shouting. Still, the noise, even
the little bit that penetrated the null area, was enough to rouse Mr.T.
He yawned and straightened up in his chair. The first thing he noticed
was that someone else was sitting there in the quiet zone, only one seat
away. The second thing he noticed

was that she was lovely. She seemed to be in her early thirties, dark
and rather exotic-loolung: mid-length black hair in a Dutch cut, very
dark eyes. She was looking up at the muted stage act and smiling very
slightly. It was not exactly a smile of approval. He thought he might
have seen her somewhere before. \"Did I miss anything?\"he asked. She
kept her eyes on the stage. \"Only some very important stuff.\" \"Could
you net it out for me?\" \"They want you to go away but not change your
longdistance account over to MCI.\" \"Anything else?\" \"Um . . . let\'s
see, you\'ve been asleep for about an hour. Was there anything else
during that hour? No, I guess not. Some songs.\" \"I see. A typically
triumphant morning for HR.\" \"Ooooh. Mr. Tompkins has awakened, how
shall we say it? in a slightly bilious mood.\" I see you have the
advantage over me,\" Mr. T. said, offering his hand. \"Tompkins.\"
\"Hoolihan,\" she said, shaking his hand. Her eyes, as she turned to
face him, were not just .dark, but almost black. It felt good looking
into them. MI-.Tompkins found himself blushing slightly. \"Urnrn . . .
first name,Webster. Webster Tompkins.\" \"Lahksa.\" Funny name.\"
\"It\'s an old Balkan name. From Morovia.\" \"But Hoolihan . . . ?\"
\"Mmm. A girlish indiscretion on my mother\'s part. He was Irish, a
deckhand on a freighter. A rather cute deckhand, I 66

(6

understand. Mother always had a weakness for sailors.\" She smiled at
him lopsidedly. Tompkins felt a sudden extra beat in his heart. \"Ah,\"
he said, cleverly. \"Ah.\" \"We\'ve met, I think.\" He meant it as a
question. \"Yes.\" She didn\'t go on. I see.\" He still couldn\'t
remember where it might have been. He looked around the auditorium.
There wasn\'t another soul anywhere near enough to hear. They were
sitting in a public auditorium and yet were able to have a private
conversation. He turned back to his charming neighbor. \"You\'re a
ReSOE, I take it?\" \"No.\" \"No? Staying on then?\" \"Also no.\" \"I
don\'t get it.\" \"Not an employee at all. The truth is that I\'m a
spy.\" He laughed, thinking it a joke. \"Do tell.\" \"An industrial spy.
You\'ve heard of such things?\" \"Yes, I guess.\" \"You don\'t believe
me.\" \"Well, . . . it\'s just that you don\'t look the part.\" She
smiled that maddening smile again. Of course, she did look the part. In
fact, she looked like she was born for the part. \"Not exactly, I
mean.\" She shook her head. \"I can give you proof.\" She unclipped her
identity badge and passed it to him. Tompkins looked down at the badge.
It was imprinted HOOLIHAN, Lahksa, over her photo. \"Wait a minute . .
.\" he said, looking more closely at the badge. O n the surface it (6

looked okay, but there was something wrong with the larnination. In
fact, it wasn\'t a lamination at all; it was just plastic wrap. He
peeled it back and the photo came away fiom the badge. He saw there was
another photo underneath, this one of a middle-aged man. And now that he
looked, her name was on a sticky label pasted on the fiont of the badge.
He lifted the label and saw the name STORGEL, Walter, underneath. \"Why,
this is about the worst forgery I can imagine.\" She sighed. \"The
resources available within the Morovian KVJ are not what you\'d call
\'sophisticated.\"\' \"You really are . . . ?\" \"Mmm. Going to turn me
in?\" \"Uh . . .\" A month ago, of course, he would have done just that.
But a lot of things can happen in a month, things that change you. He
thought about it for a moment. \"No, I don\'t think so.\" He handed her
back the pieces of her badge, which she tucked neatly into her purse.
\"Wasn\'t Morovia some kind of a, well, a Communist country?\"Tompkins
asked her. \"Uh huh. Sort of.\" \"You worked for a Communist
government?\" \"I guess you could say that.\" He shook his head.
\"What\'s the point? I mean, if the 1980\'s proved anything, it was that
Communism is a bankrupt philosophy.\" \"Mmm. The 1990\'s, of course, are
showing us that the alternative ain\'t too great either.\" \"Well, it is
true that there have been a lot of layoffs.\" \"Only 3.3 million lost
jobs in the last nine months. Yours among them.\" A long pause as Mr.
Tompkins digested that thought. Now it was he who said, \"Mmm,\" and he
thought, What a

heavy conversation. He switched gears, a r W y ,\"Tell me, Ms.
Hoolihan, what\'s it like to be a spy? I mean, I am in the market for a
new job.\" \"Oh no, Webster, you\'re not the spy type,\" she snickered.
\"Not the type at all.\" He felt a bit miffed. \"Well, I don\'t know
about that.\" \"You\'re a manager. A systems manager, and a good one.\"
\"Some people don\'t seem to think so. I\'ve, after all, been ReSOEd.\"
\"Some people don\'t seem to think at all. Such people tend to become
executives in large companies like this one.\" \"Yes, well. Anyway, just
for my information, do tell me what\'s involved in being a spy. I mean,
I never got to meet one before.\" \"As you might expect, stealing
corporate secrets, the odd kidnapping, maybe occasionally bumping
someone off.\" \"Really?!?\" \"Oh, sure. All in a day\'s work.\" \"Well,
that doesn\'t seem very respectable. You would actually kidnap people or
even . . . you know, lull them, just to gain commercial advantage?\" She
yawned. \"I guess. Not just anybody, though. For bumping off, I mean.
Whoever it was would have to deserve it.\" \"Well, even so. I\'m not at
all sure I approve. I mean, I\'m quite sure I don\'t approve. What kind
of a person would kidnap another human b e i n c w e just won\'t even
talk about the other-what kind of a person would do that?\" \"A pretty
clever person, I guess.\" \"Clever?!? You have to be clever to do
that?\" \"Not the actual act of kidnapping. That\'s fairly mechanical.
No, the trick is, knowing whom to kidnap.\" She bent down to her feet
where there was a small refrigerator bag

from which she took a canned soft drink and opened it. \"Could I offer
you a drink?\" \"Um. No, thanks. I really don\'t drink anything but . .
.\" \". . . diet Dr. Pepper.\" She pulled out a cold can of diet Dr.
Pepper. \"Oh. Well, since you have one . . .\" She pulled the tab and
passed it to him. \"Cheers,\" she said, clunking her drink against his.
\"Cheers.\" He drank a mouthfitl. \"What\'s so hard about knowing whom
to kidnap?\" \"Let me answer that question with a question. What\'s the
hardest job in management?\" \"People,\" Tompkins replied automatically.
He knew exactly where he stood on this subject. \"Getting the right
people for the right job. That\'s what makes the difference between a
good manager and a drone.\" \"Mmrn.\" Now he remembered where it was he
had seen her before. It was in that corporate management class he\'d
taken almost half a year ago. She had been in the last row, only a few
seats away when he had stood up to contest the seminar leader on this
very point. Yes, now he remembered. They\'d sent some guy named Kalbhss,
Edgar Kalbhss, to teach the course, a guy who was probably about
twenty-five and had obviously never managed anything or anyone. And he
was there to teach management to people like Tompkins, who\'d been
managing for half their lives. And the worst of it was, he was prepared
to teach a whole week with (judging fiom the agenda) not a single thing
to say about people management. Tompkins stood, told him off, and then
walked out. Life was too short for that kind of \"training.\"

She\'d heard it that day, but now he told her again what he\'d said to
Kalbhss: \"Get the right people. Then, no matter what all else you may
do wrong after that, the people will save you. That\'s what management
is all about.\" \'cMmm.\" A long, significant silence. \"Oh.\" Tompkins
caught on at last. \"You\'re suggesting that figuring out the right
people to kidnap is the same?\" \"Sure. You have to pick the ones who
will give your side a meaningful advantage, and whose loss will cripple
your competitor. It\'s not easy knowing whom to pick.\" \"Well, I don\'t
know. I suppose you could just pick the most prominent person within an
organization. Wouldn\'t it be as simple as that?\" \"Get serious. If I
really wanted to harm this organization, for example, would I pick the
most prominent person? The CEO, for example?\" \"Oh. Well, certainly not
in this case. I guess if you removed the CEO, the company\'s stock would
probably go up about twenty points.\" \"Exactly. This is what I call the
Roger Smith Effect, after the past chairman of General Motors. I was the
one who decided to sabotage GM by not removing Smith.\" \"Oh. Good
job.\" \"Now, if I did want to do some real damage to the Big Telephone
and Telecommunications Company, I\'d know exactly which managers to
pick.\" \"You would?\" Tompkins had some ideas of his own about who was
really indispensable to the company. \"Sure. Want to see?\" She took a
pad out of her purse and wrote down three names. Then, she considered
for a

moment, and wrote down a fourth. She passed the pad to hlm. He stared
at the list. \"Ugh,\"Tompkins said. \"This would be like bombing the
company back into the dark ages. You\'ve picked exactly the four who . .
.Wait a minute, these people are 6iends of mine. They have spouses and
kids. You\'re not thinking of.. .?\" \"Oh, no. Don\'t worry about them.
As long as the company keeps its present executive level, there is no
need to sabotage it. Believe me, your soon-to-be-former employer is
going nowhere, with these four good managers or without. It\'s not them
I\'m here for,Webster. It\'s you.\" \"Me?\" \"Uh huh.\" \"For what? What
use would the Morovian K-V- . . . whatever it is, have for me?\" \"The
KVJ. No, it\'s not the KVJ that needs you, but the Nation State of
Morovia.\" \"Explain, please.\" \"Well, our Nation\'s Noble Leader, we
call him NNL, for short, has proclaimed that Morovia will be first in
the world in export of shrink-wrapped software by the year 2000. It\'s
our grand plan for the hture. We\'re building a world-class software
factory. And we need someone to manage it. It\'s as simple as that.\"
\"You\'re proposing to hire me?\" \"Sort of.\" \"I\'m flabbergasted.\"
\"Also available.\" \"Well, that\'s true enough.\" Tompkins took another
swig of his drink. He looked at her cagily. \"Tell me what you\'re
offering.\"

\"Oh, we can discuss that later. When we\'re there.\" He laughed,
incredulously. \"There? You think I\'m going off to Morovia with you
before we\'ve even discussed terms.\" \"I do.\" \"I find that a very
dubious proposition. I mean, given what I know about you and your
inclination to use heavyhanded methods. Who knows what you might do to
me if I decided not to accept your offer?\" \"Who knows indeed?\" \"I\'d
be a very foolish fellow to go with you. . . .\" He stopped, wondering
what he\'d been going to say next. His tongue seemed a bit thick in his
mouth, like a dry rag. \"Very foolish. Yes,\" she agreed. \"I, uh . .
.\" Tompkins looked down at the drink in his hand. \"Say, you wouldn\'t
have . . . ?\" \"Mrnm,\" she said, smiling her mysterious smile.
\"Urghhhhh. . . .\" A moment later, Mr. Tompkins slid quietly down into
his seat, quite unconscious.

M

r\. Tompkins was dreaming. He dreamed a very long dream. It seemed to go
on for days. The first part of the dream was of him walking with his
eyes closed. There was someone on his right side, a firm hand under his
right elbow, a warm presence against his arm. There was also a faint but
very pleasant scent. The scent was light and distinctly feminine, with
notes of rose and, perhaps, ginger. He felt rather content that the
scent was there, also happy for the warmth. On his other side, there
seemed to be a male presence, not nearly so warm and one that didn\'t
smell all that great either. He thought it might be the guard,
Morris-the one who had been on duty outside the auditorium. And it was
definitely Morris\'s voice that said in his ear, \"Here we go, Mr.T.
Right this way. You\'re in good hands.\" He was in good hands. Well,
that was a relief. He was beginning to feel better and better. His
tongue seemed thick and there was still an acrid taste in his mouth, but
the whole rest of his being was pervaded by a sense of contentment. This
must be what it\'s like to be on drugs, he thought. \"Drugs,\" he

said out loud. The sound of his own voice came back into his ears,
echoing thickly. \"Drookthe,\"it said. \"Yes, dear,\" a soft voice
murmured beside him. \"Drookthe. Only some very nice, little ones.\"
Then he was walking outside in the sun, with the warm presence beside
him. Then he was riding. Then he was walking. Then he was sitting. Then
he was lying down, and all this time he felt good. The mysterious Ms.
Hoolihan was near him much of the time. They were going somewhere
together, somewhere rather naughty, he imagined. My goodness, he
thought, almost as if he were a distant observer, Webster and Lahksa,
running away together. Well, he could do a lot worse; he really could.
She was murmuring again at his ear. A lot worse. He snuggled down next
to her. Her marvelous scent was all around him. Then, they were in a
plane. The captain came by to say hello and the captain was Lahksa. The
stewardess gave him a drink and she was Lahksa, too. She held the glass
to his lips for him to drink. Then Lahksa was the captain again and had
to be away, up fiont, flying the plane. She had bedded him down on his
seat and hers together, with her sweater for a pillow. The sweater, too,
was hll of her scent.

A later part of the dream was different. At first, he thought it was a
film. Oh good, he thought, a film. Nothing like a film when you\'re on a
long flight and your new fi-iend has to be up fi-ont,flying the plane.
Wonder who\'s in the film? To his surprise, the star of the film was
Webster Tompkins. A familiar name, that, Webster Tompkins. Mr. T. tried
to remember what other films the fellow might have made.

Hadn\'t he seen one or two of them? Sure enough, afier the credits,
there was a familiar scene; he\'d definitely seen this one before. It
was the corporate training room and there was a young man lecturing
ponderously at the front. The part of the young man was played by Edgar
Kalbfuss. \"We\'ll be doing GANNT charts,\" Kalbfuss was saying, \"and
PERT charts, status reporting, a section on interfaces to the human
resources department, conduct of weekly meetings, use of e-mail, filling
out time cards, progress tracking, project milestone reporting, and-this
is a new section that we\'re very excited about\--setting up a quality
program. Yes, is that a question in the back?\" Mr. Tompkins stood.
\"Yes. My name is Tompkins. My question is, Is that it? Is that the
whole agenda?\" \"Yup, that\'s it,\" Kalbfuss answered cohdently.
\"That\'s your whole course on project management?\" \"Uh huh. Urn. Do
you feel something is missing?\" \"Nothing important. Just the matter of
people.\" \"People?\" \"Yes. We use people here to get the projects
done.\" \"Of course.\" \"I might have thought you\'d have something
about people in your course.\" \"Such as?\" \"Well, hiring, for example.
Hiring is only the most important thing a manager does.\" \"Probably
is,\" Kalbfuss allowed. \"We\'re not saying you shouldn\'t be doing
that. We\'re not saying it\'s not important to do it well either. And
we\'re not saying . . .\" \"Seems like you\'re not saying much of
anything about it at all.\"

Kalbfuss looked down at his notes. \"Um. No, I guess not. Well, you
see, hiring is one of those soft matters that\'s not too easy to
teach.\" \"Not easy, only essential. I notice you also don\'t seem to
have anything in your course about matching people to their work.\"
\"No. That too is important. However, . . .\" \"However, you won\'t be
saying anything about it.\" \"No.\" \"Nothing either about keeping
people motivated.\" \"No. Again, that\'s a soft subject.\" \"Nothing
either about team building.\" \"Well, I will be saying how important it
is. How everybody should be thinking of himself, and here I might also
say \'herself\' . . . should think of himself or herself as a member of
the team. We\'re all a team here, you know. Oh, yes. And I\'m going to
stress just how essential that is and how everybody should . . .\"
\"Yes, yes. But you won\'t be saying anything about how to build teams,
how to keep them healthy, how to get them started, how to give them a
chance of jelling, or any of that?\" \"No. We\'ll be concentrating more
on the hard science of management.\" \"You\'re going to teach us the
hard science of management without even touching on people selection,
task matching, motivation, or team formation-the four most essential
ingredients of management?\" \"Well, we\'re not going to talk about any
of those. Does something about that bother you, Mr. . . .\" \"Tompkins.
Yes, something bothers me.\" \"What bothers you?\"

\"That you\'ve got a course that leaves those four things out and you
want to call the course \'Project Management.\"\' \"Oh. So, it\'s just
the title that bothers you. Well, what should we call it then?\" \"How
about \'Administrivia\'?\" There was a soft gasp in the room. Tompkins
turned on his heel and walked out. Rewind. The same scene was playing
again: \"How about \'Administrivia\'?\"Soft gasp. Tompkins turning on
his heel and starting out of the room. One person looking after him. He
a young woman, dark and pretty, turned to see who it wasblack eyes,
lopsided smile. Lahksa Hoolihan. \"Administrivia,\" she mouthed the word
silently to him, mouthed it appreciatively. He smiled.
\"Administrivia,\" her mouth formed the word. Her mouth was frozen on
the syllable \'triv,\' her lips arched, thick and dark pink. Tompkins
stirred in his airplane seat, pulling her sweater up to his cheek,
inhaling the soft scent it exuded. Administrivia, he said to hlrnself.
He tried to remember Kalbhss\'s expression when he had said that. He
seemed to remember that the man had let his jaw drop. Yes, he had.
Administrivia . . . jaw-drop from Kalbfuss . . . gasp in room . . .
Tompkins striding out . . . Lahksa mouthing the word . . . Tompkins
mouthing the same word . . . both their mouths arched at \'triv,\'
coming close together. Replay that from \'administrivia.\'
\"Administrivia,\" he said, turned, looked at Lahksa, she formed her
mouth around the syllable \'triv,\' and he. . . . Rewind. Replay the
scene from . . . \"Poor dear,\" Lahksa\'s voice said from above. She was
bending down over him. \"You\'re caught in a loop. It\'s the

\'drookthe\' that do that to you. Make you go over the same thing,
again and again.\" \"Adrninistrivia,\"Tompkins told her. \"Yes, I
remember. You told him. I was impressed. I still am.\" She spread a
blanket over him. The film was starting over. The same film. The
corporate training room with Ms. Hoolihan and Tompkins in the back row,
Kalbfuss lecturing in front, \"GANNT charts, PERT charts, status
reporting, a section on interfaces to the human resources department,
conduct ofweekly meetings . . .\"

M.

Tompkins woke in his own bed. He was dressed in his familiar paisley
pajamas, surrounded by an old set of worn blue and white sheets he\'d
had for years. His favorite molded pillow was tucked under his head. All
these things smacked of home, but he definitely wasn\'t home. There was
a wide window just to the lefi side of his bed where there had never
been a window before. And outside that window was a palm tree, of all
things. Imagine, a palm tree in New Jersey. Only, of course, he wasn\'t
in New Jersey. Opposite the bed in the far wall was another huge window.
Tucked in beside the window was his grandmother\'s old rocker. It was
rocking slowly back and forth. Seated in the rocker was Lahksa Hoolihan.
She looked up from her book. He still had that bitter taste in his mouth
and his tongue still felt like a thick, dry washcloth. With not too much
of a struggle, he raised himself to a sitting position in the bed. God,
was he thirsty.

Lahksa pointed silently to the bedside table. He turned to find a large
glass of water with ice cubes in it. He picked it up and drank
thirstily. There was also a pitcher on the table. When he\'d drained the
first glass, he filled it again and drank till his immediate need was
past. A long silence as he struggled to understand what was going on.
\"So,\" he said at last. \"You really did do it.\" \"Mmm.\" He shook his
head in wonder. \"You people. Have you no shame? You would disrupt a
person\'s life, tear him away &-om all he held dear. . . .\" She smiled
at him. \"Oh, Webster. It\'s not as bad as that. What did you hold so
dear? Your job? The town where you lived? Sure, there were friends, but
you were resigned to leaving them behind anyway when you found new work.
So here you are. You\'ve found new work, and plenty of it. What have we
really torn you away &-om?\" There was some truth to that. Who would
miss him, really? Who was there that wasn\'t going to be left behind
soon anyway? \"I had a cat,\" he said with sudden bitterness. \"A poor
little gray cat who had no one on earth to depend on except me! A cat
named . . .\" \"Seafood,\" Lahksa finished for him. \"Yes, dear little
Seafood. We\'ve become great fkiends.\" She scratched the seat of the
chair beside her leg. A little gray cat with white paws jumped up beside
her. \"Seafood!\" Tompkins exclaimed. \"Stay away from that woman .\"
Seafood ignored him. He crawled onto Lahksa\'s lap and curled up. Lahksa
scratched the top of his head, causing the little animal to purr
happily. \"Traitor!\" Tompkins sputtered.

His clothes were laid out for him on the dresser, a pair ofjeans and an
old cotton shirt, socks and underwear. He looked pointedly at Ms.
Hoolihan, giving her the broadest possible hint that he\'d appreciate a
little privacy. She smiled impishly. Tompkins gathered up the clothes
and made his way into the bathroom. He shut and locked the door behind
him. The bathroom was huge. The open casement windows were at least six
feet tall, set into a thick wall. He put his head outside to see that
the exterior of the building was made of stone. Down below, only one
story down, was an elaborate garden. The fixtures of the bathroom were
old-fashioned, made of a handsome white porcelain with brass fittings.
Everything was clean and elegant. He might have been in a fine old Swiss
hotel. \"Got everything you need?\"Lahksa\'s voice came through the
closed door. \"Go away! Leave me alone.\" \"We can talk through the
door.\" \"We don\'t have anything to talk about.\" \"Oh, but we do. We
have to talk about your new job. I\'m afraid you\'re already dreadhlly
behind.\" \"I just got here.\" \"The schedule is running. Isn\'t it
always that way? I don\'t doubt you\'ve met your match on this one.
You\'ll never catch up.\" That annoyed him. He came out of the bathroom,
buttoning his shirt. \"If that\'s true, if I took the job and indeed I
never did catch up, it would only mean that the schedule was wrong from
the beginning. Who set it anyway? Some nitwit, no doubt. Where do you
have to go to get away &om such idiots? I am sick to death of being
given impossible schedules.\" \"You\'re cute when you get heated up.\"

That maddening smile again. She looked ravishing. \"I don\'t find you
the least bit amusing, young lady. Not at all. So just put that talk out
of the way.\" \"Yes, sir.\" She looked contrite. Actually, she looked
like a devilish woman pretending to look contrite. Tompkins sat down on
his grandmother\'s overstuffed ottoman, opposite Lahksa on the rocker.
\"Let\'s get down to brass tacks. What happens to me if I absolutely
refuse to have anything to do with you and your stupid job? If I simply
dig my heels in and say no. Do I end up at the bottom of some quarry?\"
\"Please,Webster. We\'re not at all that kind of operation. If you
don\'t see this job as the opportunity of a lifetime and take it on
willingly, we\'ll send you and Seafood and all your worldly goods back
to Penelope, New Jersey, and wish you well. We\'ll pay you an honorarium
for your time. We\'ll send you through Rome and put you up for a long
weekend there to recuperate, all hotels and air fares first-class and on
us. What could be fairer?\" \"If I can believe you.\" \"If you can
believe me. Why don\'t you try? I haven\'t told you even so much as one
little fib. Have I? Think back. Have I ever said anything but the
truth?\" He waved a hand disrnissively. \"Who knows? Suppose I take the
job. What\'s in it for me?\" \"The usual,\" she said. \"Money. Oh,
there\'s also the thrill of the thing, a sense of accomplishment,
camaraderie, meaningful achievement, all that stuff.\" \"Right. Tell me
about the money. How much?\" She pulled some papers out of the folder by
her side. \"We were thinking of a two-year contract.\" She passed him a
letter. It was addressed to him on ornate letterhead, some-

thing about the Morovian National Bureau of Something or Other. He
looked over the Terms of Employment section on the second page. They
were proposing to pay him exactly twice what he\'d been making, clear
and tax-gee, in American dollars. \"Hmpf,\" he said. \"There is also a
stock sweetener. And options,\" Lahksa told him. He shrugged that off as
hyperbole since he couldn\'t imagine what kind of stock the Nation State
of Morovia might come up with. Lahksa passed him another page. It was a
deposit slip for his own Fidelity account. Written in the Total Deposit
field was the fbll amount of the contract, two years\' salary. \"How do
I know you\'ll really pay when the time comes?\" She passed him one more
item. It was a cashier\'s check on a NewYork bank made out to him in the
fid amount. \"Payment in advance. You agree to take the job and we put
the whole payment into your account immediately. You inform your lawyer
and he calls you here when the deposit is clear. Fidelity sends a
written confirmation. We can have all that in your hands within a week.
Until then, you\'re our guest. T h n k of it as a holiday by the sea.\"
\"I don\'t even know where Morovia is.\" \"By the sea. It\'s on the
Ionian Sea, south and east of the heel of Italy. On a nice day, you can
see the mountains of central Greece &om your terrace.\" She gestured
toward the French doors on the far side of the room. Mr.Tompkins
considered. \"What\'s the job?\"he said at last. She batted her
eyelashes at him becomingly. \"I thought you\'d never ask.\"

\"So let me get this straight,\" Tompkins said, looking up fi-om the
briefing papers. \"You\'ve actually got fifteen hundred fairly senior
software engineers.\" Lahksa nodded. \"At last count. And they all work
for you.\" \"And you say they\'re good.\" \"Certified as CMM Level 2 or
higher by the Morovian Software Engineering Institute.\" \"This is
extraordinary. How did that happen? How did you end up with all these
highly trained engineers? I mean, a dinky little country like Morovia,
one would never think . . .\" \"Your biases are showing, my dear. What
you\'re really wondering is how could there be so much skill available
in a third-world post-Communist country.\" \"Well?\" \"The Communist
world did some things badly and some things well. What it did badly was
to make the centrally planned markets work so goods and services could
find their way to where they were needed. What it did well was
education.\" He had just been reading that somewhere. Where could that
have been? \"I seem to have seen that same idea just recently, and from
a fairly respectable source, I might add.\" \"Yes, it was in Lester
Thurow\'s new book. We found a copy open by the side of your bed. He was
talking about the assets and liabilities of the former Soviet Union.
Morovia is rather similar.\" \"And all my staff would speak and read and
write English?\" \"All of them. English-language skills are important
here: Morovian is not exactly a global economy fast-track language.\"

\"And the idea is to mold all this talent and good training into a
world-class software industry.\" cc Yes. To begin with: six key
development projects to produce six very carefully chosen software
products. Our noble leader, NNL, has selected the products himself. You
run the six projects and the rest of the organization. That\'s your
job.\" \"Some job. I hope you\'re ready to pay the piper. I mean, this
is going to take a huge investment in people and training and
equipment.\" \"Webster, we don\'t propose to let you down in any way.
When you look back on this from two years hence, you\'re not going to be
able to say that the people weren\'t up to it or that there weren\'t
enough of them or that you didn\'t have adequate support.\" \"Let\'s
just talk about support for a minute.\" \"You have an experienced and
resourceful personal assistant that I chose for you myself, a cadre of
some two hundred excellent development managers, experts in dozens of
key areas . . . \"I\'m going to want to bring in a few key people of my
own. I\'m going to pick them and you\'re going to deliver them. And I
don\'t want them to be kidnapped either. I want them to come of their
own volition.\" \"Sure.\" She evaded his eyes. \"No kidding, Lahksa.\"
\"Oh, all right. You\'re no fbn at all.\" c And I may need some
consultants, too, people with international reputations.\" \"As you
like. Make up your list. We\'ll deliver them.\'\' \"Damn right, you
will.\" He looked down at the notes he\'d been taking. \"I want
everybody co-located, too. No fooling around with people in different
locations. You never 77

6

get anything done if people are scattered off every which way. All
together.\" \"That\'s already been done. We\'ve moved the whole
development community to the Flopczek Lowlands, an area that NNL has
renamed \'SilikonValejit.\"\' They were seated in the living room of
Tompkins\' suite. This side of the building looked inland, away from the
sea. Lahksa stood and led him to the opposite wall, out through the
portals onto a wide balcony. The land fell away from them into a pretty
little valley. \"SilikonValejit,\" she said, sweeping an arm across the
valley. There were a half-dozen new-looking office buildings in a
cluster just below. She pointed down toward them. \"That is the
Aidrivoli Campus, Webster, your new domain; it\'s just a ten-minute walk
from here.\" \"Very pretty. If pretty valleys were all it took to make a
success, I guess Morovia would have stood the world on its ear centuries
ago.\" He looked down at his notes. \"Oh, yes, I want final say on each
and every schedule. This is a nonnegotiable demand.\" She looked bored.
\"Okay,\" she said. \"And good network support. That means an up-to-date
workstation on every desk, all networked together with ethernet or wider
band connection. I want a full-time, networksavvy support staff and a
full complement of hubs, routers, T1 or ISDN lines, the works.\" Lahksa
yawned. \"Right.\" \"What else?\" He knew he\'d better think of
everything he needed now. This was the time to lay down his demands.
\"What have I forgotten?\" \"Only the most important things. Webster,
has it occurred to you that we have an a d 1 lot of staff for the mere
halfdozen projects that NNL has sketched out?\"

Tompluns looked down at the list of projects she\'d given him. It was
true that there wasn\'t an enormous amount of work there. There were six
projects, six medium-sized sofiware products to be built. He couldn\'t
say yet exactly what each of them was, but there wasn\'t one of them
that would require more than twenty people. \"I see what you mean. Looks
like we have work here for barely a hundred people.\" \"Right. And what
are you going to do with the rest?\" \"Beats me. Is that my problem? Let
them take vacation.\" \"It\'s not your problem, Webster, but your
opportunity. Haven\'t you ever in your life wanted to set up a
controlled experiment in management? Have you never wondered what would
happen if you ran not just one project to get a given piece of work
done, but maybe three or four . . . ?\" Mr. Tompluns\' eyes got a
faraway glaze. \"A controlled experiment . . . One project with lots of
pressure and one with little and another project with almost none, all
three charged with doing the exact same task. We could watch them to see
which one finished first. I\'ve always wanted to do something like that.
We could set up one group with a staff that was too big, and another
with a staff that was too small, and a third one that had just the right
number as best I could guess it, just to see which one . . .\" Lahksa
picked up for him: \"One team with all senior people and another with
some senior folk and some novices.. . .\" He was getting into it now.
\"One staffed by people that have worked together before, pitted against
another team staffed with strangers. Why, if we could do that, Lahksa,
we could begin to investigate some of the great mysteries of management.
We could actually begin to understand what makes projects tick.\"

\"It\'s all yours,Webster. You have got all of Morovia to play with.\"
She nodded down toward Silikon Valejit. \"It lies at your feet. The
world\'s first Project Management Laboratory.\"

THECD-ROM PLANT

\'/lhave a little present for you:\' Lahksa announced. Mr-Tompkins
looked at her closely. Here was something he had not seen in her outward
appearance before: She seemed almost shy. \"A very little present,
really.\" From her voluminous shoulder bag, she pulled out a handsome
leatherbound book and handed it to him, her eyes down. He took the book
in his hand. It was a lovely thing. \"Oh,\" he said, eloquently. On the
cover was inscribed in gold letters:

Webster Tatterstall Tompkins 0 Manager 0 \"Oh,\" he said again. He
couldn\'t imagine where she had learned his middle name, which wasn\'t
on any of his various

IDS. That was, of course, the sort of thing that Lahksa was good at,
ferreting out odd bits of information. \"I thought you might profit from
your experience here in Morovia by jotting down any lessons you learned.
Who knows what you\'ll learn fiom running the management laboratory?
Something usehl, I expect.\" Inside she had written a title page in her
neat hand. It read \"What I Learned,\" followed by his name and the
year. She had also penned in an entry on the first numbered page:

Four 2iksenih.h qf Good M a w e m n t : o o o o

Get the \@ht peoph. Match them to the \@itjo6s. Keep them motivated, He&
their teams tojeK and stayjelhd: (Alf the rest is administivia.)

At the bottom of the page was a date fiom earlier in the year. Mr.T.
looked up. \"That was the date of our Project Management seminar?\"
Lahksa nodded. \"Yes. Those were the points you made that day. I thought
that they might be just the thing to get your journal started.\" The
personal assistant hand-picked for him by Lahksa was a young man named
Waldo Montifiore. He had a sleepy, country-bumpkin appearance, with a
thatch of yellow hair that stood up from the front of his head. His hair
made him look rather like the Belgian cartoon character, Tin Tin. In
fact, all he lacked to be a Tin Tin look-alike was a pair of knicker
trousers and a little white dog.

4 THE CD-ROM PLANT

He may have looked sleepy, but he was efficient enough at his job: \"You
have an appointment at ten o\'clock,\" Waldo told him. \"I just got
here. I haven\'t even sat down yet. I mean, I haven\'t even found my
office yet.\" \"It\'s in there,\" Waldo gestured vaguely toward the door
behind his own desk in the foyer. \"It\'s very attractive. Ms. Hoolihan
decorated it for you herself.\" He glanced down at his watch. \"But
maybe you can look in there later. I\'m afraid you need to be directly
on your way, or you\'ll be late.\" He gathered some papers together and
stood up. \"I\'ll walk you over to your appointment and explain along
the way.\" Out in fiont of the building, Waldo steered him along a
wooded walking path toward a construction site on the far side of the
campus. \"In order for this to make any sense, you have to think ahead
all the way to the end of the current set of projects. If they do indeed
deliver their six products and the products are as successful as we
hope, and we are\--as NNL has decreedon the way to becoming first in
world software exports by the year 2000, then we\'re going to need a
pretty serious delivery capacity to get all the software out the door.\"
\"Okay. So?\" \"So, some of that will be possible to put in place much
later, but there are certain capital projects that have to be begun now
or they\'ll never be done in time.\" He pulled out a hand-drawn network
diagram from his sheaf of papers. It looked like a PERT chart. \"We\'ll
need a pressing plant for CD-ROMs. Attached to the rear of the plant
will be the packaging facility, shrink-wrapping, manual insertion,
loading docks, and so on. As you can see,\" he put his finger on the

box labeled CD Plant Complete,\"the plant opening is directly on the
critical path.\" \"That\'s a construction project.\" \"Right.\" \"What
do I know about this stuff? I\'m a software manager.\" \"Yes. Well, you
are also the boss of the whole operation.\" \"I am? I mean, I guess I
am.\" \"You are. Head of the Naczonal Byru av Data Schrnertczung, that
is.\" \"Uh huh. That would be the National Bureau o f . . .\" \". . .
Data Schmertzing. Anyway, most of the work is specifically
software-related. But there is also this little matter of the CD-ROM
plant. I\'m afiaid the project is disastrously far behind already. And
it all falls in our lap. I mean, your lap.\" \"Sorry to hear it.\" \"Mr.
Mopoulka, the construction manager, is a very highly motivated man. He
is bound to be, since he got his marching orders &om Himself.\"
\"Himself?\" \"NNL, the Nation\'s Noble Leader. NNL can be quite
persuasive. He can be particularly graphic when he lays out the
consequences of failure.\" \"I see. One of those.\" \"Uh huh. Anyway,
Mr. Mopoulka is certainly trying his hardest. But the project keeps
falling behind.\" Tompkins nodded glumly. \"Well, we\'ll see what we\'ll
see, I guess.\" \"It\'s just been the most disastrous possible luck.\"
Mr. Mopoulka was wringing his hands. \"Who could have foreseen it? In
each of the other sites, we\'ve encountered nothing

4 THE CD-ROM PLANT

but fine white sand. Who would have thought there would be this granite
ledge right here? It\'s just terrible.\" \"So you plan to blast?\"
\"What else can we do? It will take weeks.\" \"How many weeks?\" The man
evaded Tompkins\' eyes. \"Many, many weeks. But I don\'t know how
many.\" \"Give me your best guess.\" \"It could be as many as . . .\" he
looked sharply back at Tompkins, reading his expression, \". . . as many
as ten. Yes, ten.\" \"Ten weeks,\" Mr. T. repeated. He was wondering
what different expressions he might have put on at the critical moment
to have encouraged an answer of six, or eleven, or fifteen. He was also
wondering what the real answer would turn out to be. His instinct told
him he\'d better open up a dialogue now if he was ever going to discover
the truth. \"When you say ten weeks, Mr. Mopoullca, I suppose there is
at least some chance that it would be as much as . . . twenty,\" he
offered. Mopoulka looked like he wanted to kiss him. \"Yes! Or even . .
.\" \"Thirty?\" \"Well. . . . Probably not thrty, but twenty-five.\" Mr.
Tompkins changed tacks. \"Look, Mr. Mopoulka, couldn\'t we move the
plant site over to the west, just by far enough to avoid the ledge?\"
\"We couldn\'t do that!\" Mopoulka moaned. \"We couldn\'t .\" \"Why not?
Is there granite over there, too?\" \"No, it\'s clear. But the plan, you
see, the one that NNL gave me, calls for the plant to be precisely here.
Not over there. Here. I couldn\'t just change the plan.\"

\"YOU couldn\'t?\" \"Of course not. If I did, we\'d lose time, we\'d be
late. And the lateness would be my fault, because I had decided to move
the plant, don\'t you see? Whereas this way, if we\'re late, it\'s not
really my fault at all. I hope you understand that. It\'s very important
that you understand that. And suppose somebody doesn\'t like the
plant\'s new position? Whose fault would that be? Mine.\" He looked
thoroughly miserable. \"Uh huh. Listen, while we\'re talking about
position, I note that the loading docks are at the rear of the building
and that the land there is swampy. So, the trucks will have to come and
go through all these wet lowlands, which are sure to be muddy in the
rainy season. Is there a rainy season here?\" \"Yes. In the spring. But
what can we do about that?\" \"Well, I\'m thinking that we might shift
the plant west just thirty feet or so, so the foundation is tucked right
up against the granite ledge. Then we could reverse the plant floor plan
entirely, build it as an exact mirror image of what the current plan
calls for. That way, the docks would be on this end, directly over the
ledge. We won\'t need any foundation under the docks at all, we can
anchor them directly onto the granite. What do you think?\" Mopoulka was
stunned. \"You can\'t seriously be talking about facing the plant in the
other direction.\" \"I can\'t? Why not?\" \"It\'s just not what the plan
calls for. The plan . . .\" \"Yes, we\'ll have to get the plan redone.
I\'ll take care of that. Count on me. In the meantime, just work to the
exact mirror image of what you see here.\" \"But the schedule . . .\"
\"My problem, my friend. Don\'t worry about it. You work for me now.
Build me a good plant. Keep your people

4 . THE CD-ROM PLANT

working and keep them content and keep the work moving effectively. If
you do those things, we\'re going to look at your effort as a success no
matter when the project gets done.\" He stormed back into the office,
causing Waldo to look up, startled. Mr. Tompkins paused, red-faced, in
front of the young man\'s desk. \"What the hell did NNL tell Mopoulka?
The poor fellow was terrified. You told me that Himself could be
\'persuasive.\' I think you meant \'threatening.\' What did he tell h m
, . . . that if the plant were late, Mopoulka would be sent off to the
salt mines?\'\' Waldo swallowed uncomfortably. \"Worse than that, I\'m
afraid. That he would be chopped up into little bits and fed to the
fishes, more likely. O r that he would be hung from a meathook outside
the castle wall. That one is rather a favorite for NNL.\" \"Meathook?!?
You must be kidding. Can he really do that?\" \"Well, this is, after
all, Morovia. We don\'t exactly have a long tradition of civil
liberties. Yes, I guess he could do whatever he wants. He never has, but
he could. NNL is still getting used to his new role as an autocrat. The
sky\'s the limit for \'persuasive\' technique here. This is an excellent
place for the study of negative reinforcement as a motivator.\" \"Well,
I\'m not the negative-reinforcement type. I figure the world has studied
that one just about enough up through today. Write a letter over my
signature to NNL telling him that all \'performance penalties\' like the
one dangled in front of Mopoulka are henceforth out of bounds. Tell him
that I will take sole responsibility for motivation and reinforcement,
both

positive and negative, of everyone who works for me. Tell him he can
take it or leave it. Tell him I am coming to see him tomorrow . . .\"
Waldo was scribbling furiously on his pad, \". . . and he can tell me
then that he has agreed to all these terms or that he is going to cut me
up in little pieces and feed me to the fishes, or whatever. He can do
his damnedest.\" \"Um. . . . \'SincerelyYours\'?\" \"No way. Sign it,
\'Not to Be Trifled With, Webster T. Tompkins.\' Set up an appointment
for me with NNL tomorrow afternoon. Send the letter by fax so he\'s read
it before we meet.\'\' \"Yes, sir.\" Within five minutes, Waldo had
brought in the neatly typed letter for his signature and it had been
sent off by fax. Well, he\'d done some good things in his day. He\'d
brought home an impossible project or two, pulled off some really big
system developments. He supposed he had achieved sufficient prominence
in the field so that there would be a little capsule about him at the
time of his death, published perhaps in IEEE Software or in the Annals
of the History of Computing. And whichever it was, he imagined it would
finish up on a somber note like,\"Died on Morovian meathook.\" He was in
a mood to put some order to h s life, just in case it was about to end
precipitously. But more than that, he was still angry. The memory of
stupid, destructive \"performance penalties\" he\'d come across in the
past welled up in him. Where did this \"spare the rod\" mentality come
from in some managers? Did they make such terrible parents as they made
terrible managers? Probably so.

4 THE CD-ROM PLANT

The book that Lahksa had given him was there on his desk. He opened it
to the first blank page and began to write. From Mr.Tompkins\'Journal:

5afetv and Change o

People can\'t embrace change unless theyfeel safe.

0

Change i s essential t o all success in project work (and in m o s t
other worthwhile endeavors).

o

A lack o f s a f e t y makes people riskaverse.

o

Avoiding risk is fatal, since i t causes .you t o m i s s o u t on t h e
a s s o c i a t e d benefit a s well. 8

o

People can be made t o feel unsafe by direct threats, b u t also by t h
e sense t h a t power may be used against them abusively.

NNL

a n early morning train took Mr.Tompkins fromVarsjop up to the capital
at Korsach. The little train followed the coast north as far as
Lovradje, and then turned inland. In his lap was a booklet that Waldo
had found for him called Moroviafor Travelers, published in London. This
was the first chance he\'d had since his arrival to learn anything about
Morovia. The book\'s copyright was in the name of Thomas Cook Ltd., and
was dated 1907. In between chapters, he put the book aside to
concentrate on the scenery. The coast was lush and green, spotted with
picturesque little fishing villages. There was vine growing most places,
and thick, green fields of crops. Though he saw few cars, the villages
seemed prosperous enough. The one that was pictured in his book, when he
passed through it, looked pretty much the way it had in 1907. He was
feeling remarkably calm. The truth was that Morovia needed him. The
demands he was making of NNL (no meathooks, and so on) were certainly
not unreasonable. Coming on strong would not be a bad sign, he thought,
in a

5 . NNL

new manager who was just taking charge. He ought to have some honeymoon
capital coming. Finally, he suspected that Lahksa would not have let him
go up to meet Himself if she judged he were destined for the hook. When
she\'d read his letter to NNL, she had merely shrugged. There was an
ample breakfast served on a starched white tablecloth that the porter
laid over the table in front ofTompkins\' seat. Afier the breakfast, he
allowed himself a little nap. Any remaining doubts about his likely
reception by NNL evaporated as soon as Mr. Tompkins gave his name at the
palace. The guards leapt to their feet, knuckling their hats in
deference and bowing. \"Mr. Tompkins! The Mr. Tompkins. Oh, yes, right
this way, Mr. Tompkins. Sir.\" They led him through a massive reception
hall, walled in stone overhung with wide tapestries, and then up a
curving stone stairway that must have been twenty feet wide. A young
woman in a crisp blue suit met him at the top of the stairs. \"Mr.
Tompkins,\" she said. \"Welcome. I am Miss Lane.\" Everyone\'s English
had been pretty competent, but Miss Lane\'s seemed particularly good. He
had a hunch she was American. \"I was wondering, you seem like you might
come from . . .\" \"Providence,\" she finished for him. \"Come right
this way. Himself is expecting you.\" She took him along a balcony that
opened out over a pleasant garden down below, through a large portal,
and into an entry room. There was an arched door at the back that gave
access to a huge office. Miss Lane lefi him at the door. The room was
fill of healthy, ghstening plants, oriental rugs, and overstuffed
firniture arranged into

inviting seating areas. There was no light on in the room, all the
light coming fiom three large windows that overlooked the garden. At
first, he thought he was alone in the room. Then he saw a face at the
very back, positioned behind a library table at the side of the main
desk. The face was lit up by the glow of a computer screen. There was a
faint tapping sound of fingers on keys. Tompkins approached. \"Um . .
.\" he said tentatively. \"Oh.\" The man stopped typing. \"I . . .\"

\"Uh. . .\" Tompkins opened his eyes slightly wider. Wait a minute. The
face looking back at him was familiar. It was young, barely thirty or
thirty-five, he thought, a plump, almost childish face. Wide-rimmed
glasses giving a slightly owlish look, a mop of sandy hair. \"Say, you
look like . . .\" The man waved a hand. \"Now, don\'t jump to
conclusions. I don\'t know you and you don\'t know me.\" \"No, but . .
.\" \"So, we\'ll just have to get to know each other. That\'s what I
thought we would do during this meeting. Tompkins, isn\'t it?\" \"Yes.\"
A soft handshake. \"And you are . . .\" \"I am. Yes.\" \"The Nation\'s
Noble Leader. Himself.\" \"Yes.\" Tompluns realized he had no idea what
to call the man. How does one address a sovereign ruler? He should have

5

NNL

asked Waldo. \"Um, I\'m not sure how to . . . How do you like to be
addressed?\" NNL thought a moment. \"Sir, I think. Yes, I like that.
Sir.\" \"Well, Sir, then.\" Tompkins put on his sternest look. \"Listen,
I sent you a letter.\" \"Oh, yes.\" Another dismissive wave of the hand.
\"Well, are my conditions met? There\'s no use talking about anything
else if not, you see. Those are my conditions.\" \"Let\'s don\'t sweat
the small stuff.\" \"Small stuff?!? I don\'t think of it as small stuff.
Well, do you agree to my terms? I have to know.\" A sigh. \"Sure.
Whatever you like.\" \"That\'s what I like.\" \"Sure. Uh . . .\" NNL
seemed a bit lost. He looked back regrefilly at the screen as if he
would really rather get back to whatever he\'d been doing. Now that
Tompkins could see the screen, it seemed to have a page of program code
on it, C++, he thought. There was a sound behind them in the room, and
Miss Lane arrived with a tray of soft drinks and snacks. NNL brightened
appreciably. \"Oh, good,\" he said. He helped himself to a kind of
cream-filled cake, which he stuffed into his mouth. \"My god, is that a
Twinkie?\" Tompkins couldn\'t help asking. \"Yeshe,\" NNL responded,
speaking around a mouthfbl of cake and cream fUing. He helped himself to
a Coke. Mr. Tompkins passed over the Snickers bars and canned drinks to
take a few peanuts.

There was a long, uncomfortable silence after they both had swallowed.
NNL spoke up at last: \"Settling in okay, are you?\" \"Oh, yes.\"
\"Everything you need?\" \"Uh huh.\" \"Just ask if you need anything.\"
\"I will .\" Another silence. Tompkins had what he\'d come for. He
supposed he might just excuse himself and leave. But that didn\'t seem
quite right. He ought to show some interest in the man. \"I gather
you\'re somewhat new at this. At being . . . well, whatever it is that
you are here.\" \"Tyrant. I always thought it might be nice to be a
tyrant, and now I am. Yes, it hasn\'t been too long. I, too, am just
settling in. I think I\'m going to like it.\" Tompkins went on in his
line of inquiry. \"If I could ask, how does one become a tyrant? How did
you get the job?\" NNL leaned back in the plush executive\'s chair
behind his mahogany desk. He put his feet up. \"A coup,\" he said.
\"Well, that is the official story.\" \"It wasn\'t a coup then?\" \"No,
not exactly. It was more like a leveraged buy-out.\" \"Excuse me?\" \"A
buy-out. A deal. You know, a little cash, some stock, notes, that sort
of thing.\" \"You bought Morovia?!?\" \"I did.\" \"That is . . .
extraordinary.\" \"Yes, well. I had a lot of stock in a large-ish
company in the States. And I had some money, tons of it, actually. And,
since I had always wanted . . .\"

5

NNL

\"You bought yourself a whole country? You just plunked down a pile of
cash . . . ?\" \"Mostly stock.\" NNL shook his head. \"I had all this
stock, but it wasn\'t as if I could just sell it or anything. It was
unregistered. There is this awful department of the government that
likes to torture poor executives who have made a bundle by forming new
companies. And they really had it in for me. So, for instance, when I
wanted to sell off a little stock, just enough to build a modest
residence and buy a few paintings, they had a conniption.\" He put on a
martyred expression. \"But, there is this loophole in the rules
governing executives\' stock,\" NNL went on. \"It turns out, you can
exchange your stock for similar stock in another company, and that
escapes scrutiny. So I approached the former leaders here, the generals,
and got them to incorporate Morovia. And then . . .\" \"You did a stock
switch,\"Tompkins finished for him. \"Exactly. The generals became very
rich, and they went away to live on the Riviera-or wherever rich old
Morovian generals go. And I got Morovia.\" \"You own the country, all
the land and the buildings, and even the people.\" Tompkins could hardly
believe it. \"Well, not the people. At least, I don\'t think so. But
everything else. And just to make it all perfectly aboveboard, we had a
plebiscite to confirm what we\'d done. Passed by an overwhelming
majority. Of course, we had to sweeten the deal by giving out stock and
options to the citizens. It worked out well for everyone.\" \"But why
would you do such a thing?\" \"Well, the balance sheet, for one thing.
My god, it\'s a better deal than has ever been done on Wall Street. All
these natural resources, the beaches, the farms, the mountains.

Imagine the potential, just &.omdropping in a few resorts on this
beautiful coast. And all of it undeveloped. I can tell you that Marriott
and Intercontinental are very interested. So is Disney.\" Tompkins just
shook his head. \"Then, of course, there is all that marvelous, educated
manpower, all those programmers and analysts and designers, software
people. I didn\'t tell you, but I was in the software business back in
the States.\" \<\< I see.\" \"I thought this could be the ultimate
software factory.\" cc I see your point.\" \"And running it as Tyrant,
rather than just as CEO, had some special advantages, at least I thought
so.\" \"Special advantages such as?\" \"Well, at my other company, when
I tell people what I want-this or that product done by the end of the
year, for e x a m p l e 1 always have to cope with the nay-sayers.\"
Nay-sayers?\" \"I always seem to be surrounded by them,\" NNL said
unhappily. \"I say \'end of the year,\' and they wrinkle up their brows
and say, \'Oh, no, Bill. Oh, no. No, that won\'t be possible at all. Oh,
no, Bill. Simply impossible.\"\' He was shaking his head sadly. \"It\'s
enough to make you puke.\" Tompkins tried to look sympathetic.
\"Whatever I wanted, it was always \'Oh, no, Bill.\' Well, I thought,
just once, I\'d like to be in a position where people simply coul8n\'t
say \'Oh, no, Bill.\' Where they wouldn\'t even dream of saying no.\"
\"So, you thought that the position of Tyrant would give you certain
managerial advantages.\" \"I did.\" 66

5

NNL

\"And then I came along, and ruined it.\" Oh, even before you came,
things were going sour. Awfully sour. Take this guy, Mopoulka, who\'s
building the CD-ROM plant. When I gave him the job I told him, \'You\'ll
have this plant built for me in eighteen months or I will have your head
on a platter.\' I actually said that. \'Head on a platter.\' I\'d always
wanted to say that and I did say it, and it felt wonderful. I can tell
you, he did not even think of saying \'Oh, no, Bill.\' Not even a tiny
little inclination. He just turned white and said,\'Yes, Sir.\' It was
glorious.\" \"But then it turned sour, you say?\" \"He got behind
anyway!\" NNL moaned. \"He got behind. He was going to be late, no
matter what I had said, no matter what the penalties. And then what the
hell am I supposed to do? Who would ever believe me again if I let him
off. I\'d have had to have his head on a platter.\" \<\' I see.\" \"I
don\'t even know how the hell you do that. I mean, who does the dirty
work? Do I have a Headsman who works for me? I don\'t even know. Maybe
I\'d have to do it myself. Damn. What a thankless task that would be.
You chop off some guy\'s head, just to keep up discipline you know, and
who ever appreciates what you\'ve done? Nobody, I can assure you. Even
though it may be quite necessary. What a mess.\" He put his head down on
the desk like a schoolchild who\'d been punished. Mr. Tompkins waited a
full minute for NNL to go on. Nothing. \"So I kind of saved you,\"
Mr.Tompkins ventured. \"Yes.\" The voice was mufled under his arms and
against the desk. \"I let you off the hook, so to speak.\" \"You did.\"
ac (6

NNL was feeling somewhat better after two more Twinkies and another
Coke. \"We should talk about the projects,Tompkins. About one of them at
least. There is one that I have a particularly good feeling about.\"
\"Which one is that?\" \"Well, now think about this the way that I did
when I first sketched the projects out. We want to be first in the world
in software exports by the year 2000, so what do we do?\" \"Think up
some products and build them.\" \"No. We build them, but we don\'t think
them up.\" He was tapping his head as though he just had an ingenious
thought. \"We don\'t have to think them up.\'\' \"We don\'t?\" Mr.
Tompkins asked. \"No. They\'ve already been thought up. What the hell,
why invent something new? We already know what the bestselling products
are. We\'ll just rebuild them.\" \"Isn\'t that illegal?\" \"Not exactly.
It would be illegal to copy the code directly, that\'s what\'s
copyrighted. But when you rebuild a product &om scratch, there is no
legal problem there. We may make one or two cosmetic changes, just so
the thing is not identical. That should be sufficient. Then, nobody has
the right to sue us. And, of course, there is no court to put the case
in anyway, even if our competitors wanted to sue. This is the brave new
world of global competition. Courts don\'t play much of a part.\" I
see.\" \"So what do we build? What is the most successful sofiware
product of all time? In terms of copies sold, that is. Which one?\" \"I
have a hunch you\'re going to tell me.\'\' bb

5

NNL

\"It\'s Quicken,\" he said.\* \"Quicken.\" \"Yes. Made by Intuit.
Millions of copies sold. Runs on PCs and Macs and Suns and Unix boxes.
Everybody who\'s got a computer has a copy of it. People all over the
world use it to balance their checkbooks or run their small companies or
manage their investments.\" \"Well, not to be a nay-sayer, but if
everybody has already got a copy of it, how are we going to sell ours?\"
\"That, of course, is the same problem that Intuit has. Since they\'ve
already sold a copy to just about everyone, you might wonder where their
fbture revenue will come from. It\'s obviously expected to come from
somewhere, or their stock would not be selling at such a large multiple
of earnings.\" \"So, where does the fbture revenue come from?\" \"New
versions.\" \"We\'re going to sell our Quicken in direct competition
with their upgrades? Why would anyone buy from us?\" \"Price
competition.\" \"How do we price-compete with a product that sells for
about \$29.95?\" \"We\'re going to give ours away!\" \"What? How do we
make money doing that?\" NNL looked mysterious and exceedingly pleased
with himself. \"You build the product for me, and I\'ll make money with
it. Tons and tons of money. That is a promise.\" On the train back down
the coast to Varsjop, Mr. T. pulled his journal out of his bag. He had
resolved to write something in it every chance he had, every time he
learned something. But

\* Quicken is a registered trademark of Intuit, Inc. 45

what had he really learned today? He\'d like to make an entry on \'How
to make money giving your product away for free,\' but he clearly
wasn\'t ready for that one yet. He had yet to learn how the trick would
be done. Curiously, though, he had no doubt that NNL would pull it off.
The man seemed to have a certain knack for business. Maybe there was
something to learn fiom the matter of Mopoulka and the threat that NNL
had originally used, hoping to get the plant built on a very tight
schedule. After a few moments thought, he opened the journal and began
to write. From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

Negative Keinforcernent o

Threats are an imperfect way t o motivate performance.

o

No matter how serious the threat, the work still won\'t get done on time
if the time originally allocated for i t was not sufficient.

o

Worse still, if t h e t a r g e t doesn\'t get met, you may actually
have t o make good on your threats.

In

deciding if he should take the job, Mr. Tompkins had concentrated
entirely on the question of whether or not the job deserved to be taken.
He\'d asked himself: Were the basic parameters workable? Could his
immediate superiors-NNL and the Morovian government-be trusted? Was the
undertaking sufiiciently challenging?Would the effort be adequately
rewarded? But now that he had made the decision and decided to stay,
another kind of question began to bother him: Was he up to it? The truth
was, he had never managed this many people before. He had run a project
with two hundred fifty once, and some thirty-five middle managers. But
fifteen hundred! En Morovia, there would be nearly as many managerial
staff reporting to him as he\'d had in total staff on his largest
project. And they were all unknown quantities. As Waldo kept reminding
him, he needed to act now to staff and allocate the projects. NNL had
laid out six projects to be the beginning of Morovia\'s powerful new
presence in the software world. Six projects, that wasn\'t so bad, but
he still wanted to

avail himself of Lahksa\'s offer to run multiple teams doing the same
work under different conditions, the Project Management Laboratory.
Assuming he had three competing teams on each assignment, that meant
he\'d have to set up eighteen project teams and choose eighteen
managers. Waldo had required each of the two hundred working software
managers to make up a resume, and now the two hundred resumes were
sitting on his desk. He stared at them in dismay and they stared back at
him, accusingly. He hadn\'t the foggiest idea of how to begin. When he
was sufficiently stressed (he\'d noticed this years before), he had a
terrible tendency to go blank, to drop out, and do something mindless
rather than face the work. The mindless thing today was to read a book
that Lahksa had packed up &om the pile in his bedroom and put away here
in the bookshelf of his office. The book was called Structural
Cybernetic Management. He had always meant to read it. Before, though,
he had always been too busy managing to have time to learn the theory
behind it. Now he was determined to make time, at least to take a few
hours before facing the horrible pile of resumes. He put his feet up on
the desk and began to read. The book was deadly. At the end of each
chapter, he would put it down and open his journal to make some notes
about what he had learned from the author. And, chapter after chapter,
he had come up blank and not written down a single thing. \"All the good
s t u a probably at the end,\" he muttered to himself after Chapter 10.
He pressed on into Chapter 11. Wddo came in with a cup of strong
Morovian coffee. He looked oddly at Mr. T. \"The boss is in the dumps,\"
he observed.

\"Steeling myself for the task ahead,\" Tompkins told him, with a nod
toward the massive pile of resumes. \"A bit daunting, isn\'t it?\" Waldo
said, sympathizing. \"It is. I\'ll get to it, though. Thought I\'d just
take a bit of time to get myself inspired before beginning. I\'m
learning \'structural cybernetic management,\' which will no doubt be
invaluable in sorting through the various managers on our staff and
making my choices for which one to put where.\" \"Ah.\" \"Ah indeed.\"
\"How did you make your people decisions in your old position, Boss? I
mean, before learning the structural cybernetic approach? If I could
ask.\" Tompkins closed the book and sat up. \"That was quite different.
I didn\'t make any decisions alone. I had a trusted group of peers and
subordinates that I had known for years. We\'d sit around and hash over
the possibilities.\" cc I see.\" \"I\'ve got the\'sitting around\' part
pretty much under control. .. I\' \"Uh huh. It\'s the \'hashing over\'
part that isn\'t going so well. No one to hash with.\" Waldo observed.
Mr.Tompkins sighed. \"Too true.\" There it was in a nutshell. He was
utterly alone. Lahksa had said he could bring along some people of his
own and import a few consultants. But it would be a long period of
negotiation and arranging before anyone actually showed. Nobody jumps in
an instant to take a new job in Morovia. (He was beginning to understand
why Lahksa had opted for kidnapping.) No, there would be no familiar
face on board for a long time, perhaps months. And during those months
he\'d have to make all of the key decisions alone, decisions that would
set the projects irrevocably on their way.

\"There is, perhaps, one possibihty . . .\" Waldo suggested. \"There
is?\" \"I mean, a possibility for a kind of instant \'peer,\' someone
who\'s had a long experience managing large efforts like this in
American companies. His name is Binda.\" \"Oh, yes, NNL mentioned him.
He was the guy who was originally picked for my job, wasn\'t he?\"
\"Yes. Lahksa brought him over, in the usual way . . . \"And the fellow
had the good sense to decline?\" \"More or less.\" \"But then, didn\'t
he go back?\" \"No. For some reason he hung around. It was all very odd.
None of us ever got to meet him. He arrived, moved into his suite-it\'s
right adjacent to yours-and then went away. He comes back occasionally
to get books or to drop things off. He doesn\'t stay the night. I don\'t
even know what he looks like.\" \"And you\'re thinking he might be
willing to sign on as a part-time consultant.\" \"Wouldn\'t hurt to
ask.\" Waldo was looking coy. And he had something behind his back.
\"Mmm. And what you\'re holdmg behind your back is, no doubt, Binda\'s
resume. Give it here,Waldo.\" \"You\'re way ahead of me, Boss.\" Waldo
handed over the four sheets. Tompluns read the credentials out loud:
\"\'B. Binda. Born, 1950. Education: U.C. Berkeley, summa cum laude,
stroke of the varsity crew; MBA, Harvard. Professional experience: Xerox
PARC, Apple, short stint at Tandem, eight years running major projects
at Hewlett-Packard, and ten at Computer Sciences.\' Wow, and look at
these projects, not a loser among 7,

them. I\'d always wondered who\'d been in charge of some of these.\"
\"I don\'t know if he would be willing, of course.\" \"But it wouldn\'t
hurt to ask, as you said. What the hell-I think I\'ll do it. Who knows,
maybe the guy will come on board as a second.\" He was feeling better
already. With someone like Binda at his side, he would feel a good deal
less daunted by the task ahead. \"How do I find him?\" \"You had best
ask Lahksa about that.\" Waldo picked up Tompkins\' empty cup and
disappeared. Tompkins headed down the corridor to Lahksa\'s office.
Since there was not much desk work in her trade, her office didn\'t even
have a desk. What it had instead was a comfortable couch by the window.
He found her there, curled up with a paperback. \"Lahksa, where do I
find this B. Binda? Any idea where he hangs out?\" \"She.\" \"What?\"
\"She. She\'s a woman,Webster. You remember women.\" He stared at her
blankly. \"Oh. I just thought . . .\" \"Your biases are showing, dear.
Women can be managers, too.\" \"I\'m not the least bit biased.\" He
dumped the image of himself and his new male colleague Binda, working
through the resumes over a few beers and telling war stories &om their
not-too-dissimilar pasts. And, in its place, he tried to imagine himself
and . . . He didn\'t even know her name. \"What\'s her name?\"
\"Belinda.\"

Himself and Belinda Binda. \"Not the least bit biased,\" he told her.
\"Waldo says she elected to stay on in Morovia, at least for a bit. Any
idea where I can find her?\" Lahksa closed her book and sat up. \"You
know her story, I guess.\" \"She turned you down. Smart woman.\" \"No,
it wasn\'t quite like that. She had burned out a few years ago. If you
look closely at her resume, you see it has nothing after 1995. She just
walked off the job one day and never went back. The resume in your hands
was compiled by myself. I got a copy of her earlier resume &om CSC and
filled in a summary fiom their records of what she had done while she
was there.\" \"Does Computer Sciences know they gave this information to
you?\" \"Of course not,\" she put on her impish look. \"Anyway, then I
set out to track her down. I found her living in San Jose.\" \"Plenty of
good high-tech companies there. She was probably . . .\" \"She was a bag
lady.\" \"What?\" \"A bag lady, complete with a shopping cart full of
old stuff. I remember, she was distinctly grimy.\" \"I can\'t believe
this. You tried to hire a bag lady for this job?\" \"She was the
world\'s greatest project manager in her day. She never missed a
deadline, never brought in a project that was less than a success. And
there are about a thousand people in the industry who would work for her
again in a minute, who would follow her into battle.\" \"But a bag lady,
living in the streets!\"

\"She was still sharp, the best. We talked for an hour about managing
large efforts. I never heard anyone make more sense on the subject.
Anyway, I thought I\'d see if she might not be ready to come in from the
cold. After an hour, I made my offer.\" \"You offered her the job.\"
\"No, a sugar cube with two cc\'s of secobarbital and a drop of LSD.
It\'s my usual formula, the same one I used on you.\" \"The
\'drookthe.\"\' \"Yes. She popped it into her mouth. Said her body was
sadly low on mind-altering substances.\" \"So, you brought her back
here, and then told her about the job?\" \"I did. She said \'thank
you,\' very politely. Said she\'d always wanted to travel, and why not
Morovia? She asked me if the weather was nice. I said it was, and she
stood up and left. She walked down to the docks by the harbor. She\'s
been there ever since.\" \"She\'s become a Morovian bag lady.\" Lahksa
sighed. \"Yes, that\'s about it.\" She wasn\'t hard to spot. Given that
she\'d been on the Berkeley women\'s crew,Tompkins knew she\'d have to
be tall, and she was. Even seated there on the grass in the harbor park,
she looked long and lithe. And there was something magnetic about
her-either magnetic or a little crazy; it was in her eyes. \"I think
you\'re Belinda Binda.\" \"Not a bad thought. And who do you think you
are?\" \"Tompkins. Webster Tompkins.\"

\"Pull up some grass.\" She glanced down at the spot beside her, and
Tompkins sat himself down. Belinda was sorting cans and bottles. All of
the bottles and some of the cans, it appeared, had value (NNL had
instituted deposit containers as a way to clean up the mess on the
streets). Some of the cans, however, had no deposit markings on them.
The ones that were redeemable she would place in a huge potato sack at
her side and the others she would toss into the wire trash container
under the palm tree. Tompkins watched in wonder. The trash container was
a good thirty feet away, but she never missed. Every single can she
threw landed exactly in the container. \"Wow,\" he said afier the first
few tosses. \"You\'re good.\" \"Concentration,\" she said. \"You just
have to not think about it. Keep your mind disengaged. As it turns out,
I don\'t have anything else on my mind anyway.\" \"I see. The value of
an uncluttered mind.\" \"Uncluttered, or maybe just empty.\" \"I\'ve
brought you something-maybe it will engage your mind a bit. A gift.\" He
handed her his copy of Structural Cybernetic Management. She thumbed
through a few pages and then began to skim rapidly, pausing only to pick
up a few words here and there and some of the figures. Then she closed
the book. \"Sweet of you,Webster, to bring me a gift. Sweet. But, uh . .
.\" \"Not your cup of tea?\" \"No.\" Belinda tossed the book in a long
arch ending in the trash can. \"Pure schlock.\" \"Mmm. You don\'t mince
words, do you?\" \"Has to do with being a bag lady. You should try it.
Really. Tends to fiee you of your constraints.\"

\"I imagine. Well, in the case of Structural Cybernetic Management, I
had come to approximately the same opinion as you. It just took me
longer. Somehow, the book misses the point on what management is all
about. I mean, it\'s entirely too . . .\" \"Heady. It\'s f d of
head-stuff. Management is not exactly a cerebral science.\" \"No, I
suppose not.\" \"If you think about which of your organs is active as
you manage, the head doesn\'t come into it much at all. Management is in
the gut, in the heart, and in the soul.\" \"It is?\" \"It is. The
manager has to learn to trust her gut, lead &om the heart, and build
soul into the team and into the organization.\" \"Trust her gut . . .\"
\"That\'s for people decisions. You consider someone for a key position
and he or she looks fine on paper, but something tells you to keep on
looking. That something is your gut. And then someone else comes along,
and a little voice inside you sings out, \'This is the guy!\' or
\'She\'s the one! Grab her and put her in charge of the whole works and
leave her alone.\' That\'s the gut speaking. The best managers are the
ones with the best guts. The key brain function a manager has to master
is to learn when to trust her gut.\" \"Wh huh.\" Tompkins pondered.
\"That\'s the gut. And the heart?\" \"It\'s your heart that people
respond to. They don\'t follow you because you\'re clever or because
you\'re always right, but because they love you. I know that sounds very
nutsy-granola, but it\'s the truth. I look back at the managers that I
admired and they all had hearts as big as houses. Somehow, it\'s

the heart that is the essence of leadership. The heady \'leader\' can
lead, but people won\'t follow.\" Mr. Tompkins chewed that over for a
moment. \"It\'s an impossible formula, of course. Because you can\'t do
much about the heart you\'ve got. Your take on management doesn\'t
provide any way for people to learn to be good managers.\" \"Maybe not.
Maybe you have to be born to it.\" He shook his head. \"I haven\'t
figured that one out completely. Maybe you do have to be born to it. And
yet people grow into management, too; they start out awkward and become
confident and eventually make wondehl managers. Is it that they\'re
growing hearts as big as houses?\" \"I think they are.\" \"Maybe so. And
the soul? How does that figure in?\" he asked her. \"That\'s a bit more
complicated. It has to do with the fact that projects prosper to the
extent that people learn to work together effectively. If they worked
entirely apart, a bunch of piece workers in different places who didn\'t
even know each other, then soul wouldn\'t matter. Management would be a
simple matter of coordinating their efforts. It would be an entirely
mechanical process.\" \"Maybe the structural cybernetic approach would
work in such cases.\" \"It might. But the real world requires close,
warm, and almost intimate interconnections between team members, and
easy, effective, interaction through the whole organization.\" \"So, how
do you make that happen?\" \"Well, you don\'t make it happen at all. You
let it happen. You create an atmosphere where it can happen. And then,
if you\'re lucky, it does happen.\" \"The role of the manager in all of
this is . . . ?\"

\". . . is creating the atmosphere where healthy interactions have
their best chance to happen. That\'s what I call building soul into the
organization. You do that in various ways, but you have to do it. Maybe
you make a cult of quality work, or you instill in people the sense that
the group is, in some sense at least, an elite, the best in the world.
You get them to think about integrity and all the baggage that word
carries. Whatever it is, there has to be some shared vision. It\'s that
shared vision that unifies the group. I think of it as soul.\" \"Sounds
complicated.\" \"Not terribly. You see, the group so desperately wants
to be unified. The human creature has-built into its firmware-a need to
be part of a community. And, in today\'s rather sterile modern world,
there isn\'t much community to be had. In particular, the bedroom
communities where most people live are all bedroom and no community.\"
\"That\'s true. An amazing number of twentieth-century people don\'t
even know their neighbors.\" Community doesn\'t come &om our towns
anymore. But the need for community is still in us. For most of us, the
best chance of a community is at work.\" Mr. Tompkins needed to pinch
himself. He was sitting here next to a bag lady in a Morovian park
talking about soul and community. Stranger things must have happened to
someone, somewhere, but certainly not to him. O h well. He pressed on,
\"So what you referred to earlier as \'building soul into the
organization\' is really an exercise in community building.\" \"Uh huh.
It is. The soul you foster in the organization is like the sand in an
oyster; it is the seed around which community begins to form.\" (6

He looked out over the harbor, letting his eyes go unfocused. Belinda
went back to sorting cans and bottles. \"So, that\'s it then?\"he said
after a long pause. \"Gut, heart, and soul. That\'s what management is
all about.\" \"Mmrn. Gut, heart, and soul . . . and nose.\" \"Nose?\"
\"Yeah. The great manager also needs a nose for bullshit.\" Mr. T.
stayed on for most of the afternoon, chatting with Belinda Binda. As the
dusk was coming over them, he made his pitch. \"Belinda, I\'d like to
put your expert gut to work. Would you consider that? Would you come to
work with me.\" \"You want to bring me on as a consultant?\" \"Yes.\"
\"It will cost you dearly,Webster.\" Name your price.\" \"A shopping
cart.\" \"That\'s it? A shopping cart?\" \"That\'s it. You can\'t
imagine what a bummer it is to be a bag lady without a shopping cart. No
place to put your stuff.\" \"A shopping cart. Okay, you got it then.
It\'s a deal.\" They shook hands soberly. \"You\'ll have to clean up a
bit,\" he told her. He looked down pointedly at her bare feet and
ankles, which were black with grime. You want me to wash, maybe put on
some clean clothes?\" \"Yes,\" he said firmly. \"You want me to imitate
a normal person.\" 66

6C

\"Yes. At least in appearance. The rest of you, I don\'t want to change
at all.\" \"She wants a shopping cart,\" he told Lahksa. Lahksa rolled
her eyes. \"How difficult can that be? We just go to the local
supermarket and requisition one.\" \"Webster, there are no supermarkets
in Morovia.\" \"Oh.\" \"This is the third world, remember?\" \"Well,
we\'ll have to get one from abroad then. Go to London and steal one fiom
Sainsburys. That should be right up your alley. That\'s what industrial
spies are good at, aren\'t they? Stealing stufE\"\' \"I\'m certainly up
to that. Sainsburys will be no problem. It\'s British Air I\'m thinking
about. Can you imagine the belly-aching when I try to bring back a
shopping cart as checked baggage? They\'ll have a kitten.\" He left
Lahksa to work it out. Back in his office, he opened his journal and
took out a pen. From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

The Manager\'s Essential Body Parts o

Management involves heart, gut, soul, and nose.

lead with t h e heart, t r u s t your g u t ( t r u s t your hunches),
build soul into t h e organization, develop a nose for bullshit.

B e l i n d a showed up at his oflice in a fiesh sundress. She was
sparkling clean. The only accommodation she was unwilling to make was
footwear. She came with bare feet. \"Shoes? Never again,\" she told him
when he asked. He decided he could live with that. She towered over him
by a good six inches anyway, even in her bare feet. \"Well,\" he said,
\"I guess we should get started.\" He pulled up a chair for her at his
desk and gestured toward the pile of resumes. \"There\'s what we\'ve got
to get through.\" Belinda Qdn\'t sit. She picked up one of the resumes
with a look of some distaste on her face. \"How far away are these
people?\"she asked after a moment. \"Hours away?\" \"More like minutes
away, I should think. They\'re all somewhere in the complex, I guess.\"
She brightened. \"Oh, that\'s good.\'\' She pulled up a wastebasket and
swept the whole pile of resumes into it. \"Let\'s look at the people
instead of looking at their resumes.\" Mr. Tompkins stared at her in
amazement, but she was already on her way to the door.

Waldo had a list for them of the people they\'d need to interview and
where on the campus they could be found. Within a few minutes, they
found themselves in the office of the first candidate, a bright-looking
young man, dressed impeccably in sports jacket and brown slacks. \"Tell
us about your view of management,\" Belinda suggested. \"What\'s it all
about, this business of managing projects?\" The man got a glow in his
eyes, obviously relishing what was to come. \"Management . . .\" he
said. \"When I think about management, I always remember the movie
Patton. Did you see that movie? You remember, with George C. Scott as
Patton?\" Both Belinda and Webster nodded. \"Well, I am like Patton. I
mean, the project manager is like Patton. Has to be. Like Patton in that
first battle scene in the movie where he directs the attack on Rommel.
He is the one who gives shape to the whole battle. He calls all the
shots.\" The young man was on his feet now, waving his arms over an
imaginary battlefield. \"Bring in the air support! he says. And the air
support comes in. Ack-Ack-Ack-Ack! Kaboom! Turn the flank! Here there,
left squadron, attack! Attack! And now fill back. Quickly there,
quickly! Now wait, wait, wait for my command. . . . NOW! Attack, attack,
give them all you\'ve got! Right wing, come to their support. Yes,
that\'s it, that\'s it. Now more tactical air: bombs right up the
middle. And now, the pi&e de histance, the Reserve: Come on, Reserve,
down &om the left side, hurry up. Yes, right there, exactly where the
enemy is not suspecting it. Poweeee! Kaboom! Wipe them up. Yesss!!!\"

Mr. Tompkins\' jaw had dropped. He made an effort to close it. He
looked over at Belinda. She seemed impassive, maybe a bit sleepy. \"I
see,\"Tompkins said, afier a moment. \"So, that\'s your view of
management.\" \"Absolutely. Just like commanding a tank battle. The
manager is the brains and everybody else is just foot soldiers.\"
Afterward, out in the hall alone with Belinda, Mr. T. observed, \"Seemed
an earnest young man. You were not overly impressed, I gather.\" She
made a face. \"You did see that film, Webster? Patton? Did you see it,
and do you remember it?\" \"I did and I do.\" \"The scene at the
beginning where Patton \'commands\' the battle, as our young fiiend
would have it: Well, Patton doesn\'t give a single command in that
scene. He just watches the whole thing through his binoculars. He picks
up the fiont of the Panzer division as it comes through the pass into
the valley, just as he had expected it would. And there, standing in the
well of the first tank, is an officer with a riding crop under his arm.
Patton focuses in on him and says, \'Rommel, you magnificent bastard. I
read your book.\' He\'s read the book so he knows exactly what Rommel
would be likely to do. Now the battle begins. The attack, the flank
maneuver, the feigned withdrawal, the re-attack, the air support, the
arrival of the reserves. Patton just watches. He never gives a single
instruction.\" \"So, the lud had it a bit turned around. I didn\'t
remember the details exactly myself.\" \"He remembered what he wanted to
remember. What he wanted to remember was that the General, the manager
in his

mind, was the only active intelligence in the battle, that everyone
else was \'just foot soldiers.\"\' \"Ah.\" \"That wasn\'t Patton at all.
He was not the active intelligence of the battle. That intelligence had
been spread around to all his subordinates. By the time the battle
began, Patton\'s job was already done. And he knew it.\" The second
interview was over before it began. They sat down in front of a second
earnest-looking young man, also rather nicely dressed. \"Well, tell us a
bit of your philosophy of management,\" Mr. T. suggested, taking his
clue from Belinda\'s earlier opening. \"Um. . . .\" the young man began.
Belinda turned to Webster. \"Hire him,\" she said. \"What?!?\" \"Hire
him.\" \"Wait, I haven\'t even got his name written down yet.\"
\"Kartak. Elem Kartak,\" the man told him. \"Do I really have the job?\"
\"Well, I guess so. . . .\" Tompkins said. \"Definitely,\" Belinda said.
Tompkins dutifully wrote the man\'s name down on his clipboard. Oh well,
that was one. Only seventeen more to go. Out in the corridor again,
Tompkins turned to his colleague. \"Belinda, what on earth was that all
about?\" \"Well, I talked to some of his people while you were in the
men\'s room. When I asked them about Elem, the lights went on in their
eyes. And did you notice how his office was set up?\"

\"Uh . . .\" \"It wasn\'t an office at all. It was set up like a war
room, a command center, with all the work artifacts pasted up on the
walls .\" \"I did notice that the walls were totally papered with
drawings.\" \"Designs, interface templates, schedules, milestone charts.
It was beautiful. And no desk. Only a long table with lots of chairs.
It\'s obvious they\'re all involved in running the war room.\" \"So,
that\'s what we\'re looking for? Managers without desks? Managers who
turn their offices into war rooms?\" \"What we\'re looking for are
managers who are awake enough to alter the world as they find it, to
make it harmonize with what they and their people are trylng to
accomplish.\" They completed nearly thirty interviews the first day. The
interviews fell neatly into two types. In the first type, Belinda would
smile politely, looking only a bit sleepy, and wait for the candidate to
finish; then they\'d make their exit. In the second type, she would cut
the candidate off and tell Webster to hire him or her. It wasn\'t always
clear to Tompkins what she was seeing, but they all felt pretty good to
him. She obviously trusted her hunches. Occasionally, he would make the
call, with Belinda nodding her agreement. Before leaving one of their
new hires, Belinda would always ask for pointers about who that person
thought were the best of the other managers in the organization. By the
last interview that day, they were both wearing down. They were shown
into the office of a woman named Molly Makrnora. Belinda asked her to
describe the project

she was currently running, an effort to produce some report generators
for the Morovian Port Authority. Molly started off with reasonable
enthusiasm, but was interrupted by a knock at the door. \"Um, excuse
me,\" she said. \"One of my people, I guess.\" The man at the door was
obviously Istraught. \"Molly,\" he said,\"there\'s a guy out here who
needs to go to confession. He needs to, bad.\" \"Oh, sure,\" she said.
\"Let me get my scarf.\" She walked back to a cupboard and leaned over
it, keeping her back to the door. Webster and Belinda, unable to contain
their curiosity, stepped out into the corridor, where they saw the back
of the same man disappearing into an ornately carved wooden cabinet with
two doors. He pulled the curtain closed behind him, and a moment later,
the green light over his door turned red. Molly came out behind them,
placing a flowered silk scarf around her neck. \"This won\'t take two
minutes,\" she told them. She stepped into a second door and closed it
solidly. They heard the sound of a sliding panel opening between the two
separate parts of the little enclosure, and then, after a moment,
murmuring voices &-ominside. There was a silence, then the sound of the
same panel being closed again. The light turned from red to green and
the man exited, moving quickly down the corridor and around the corner.
Shortly thereafter, Molly emerged. She took off her scarf and led
Belinda and Webster back into her office. She shut the door. \"You\'re
wondering what that was all about.\" \"Actually, we were,\" Mr. T.
confirmed.

\"Well, he needed to tell me that his testing work was going to take
longer than expected. In fact, he\'s going to miss the milestone date by
at least two weeks, maybe as much as four.\" She walked to her white
board and drew a red circle around one of the milestones. Then, she
sketched in a band of possibilities some four weeks wide to show where
the revised milestone was likely to occur. She turned back to them,
found them looking unenlightened. \"Sometimes, it\'s hard just to look
your boss in the face and say you\'re going to be late. Sometimes, it\'s
easier just to be late. But then the problem is that the boss finds out
weeks after you might have told her, often when there\'s not much she
can do about it. Anyway, we worked out this idea for a semi-anonymous
mechanism. Of course, I always know who it is that\'s confessing, but I
pretend I don\'t. And they know that I know, but they pretend that they
don\'t. The result is that bad news has an easier way to get to me.\"
Belinda was on her feet, looking at Mr. T. \"Anything else you want to
know about Molly Makrnora?\"she asked him. \"No, I think that will be
fine. Welcome to the team, Molly. We\'ll be back to you with your
specific assignment.\" \"One other thing,\" Belinda said, turning to
Molly. \"You called your confessional a \'semi-anonymous\' mechanism.
Would it be of any use to you to have a truly anonymous way to
communicate? For example, suppose we set up an anonymous e-mail ID with
a password known to all your people so that any of them could get a
totally anonymous message to Molly was nodding. \"We tried to set that
up. The powers that be, the network administrators, turned us down. They
were horrified by the very idea. I suspect they were afraid it

might be used for poison-pen messages, or something like that. Anyway,
they said no, loud and clear.\" \"I\'m going to reason with them,\"
Belinda replied. \"With a hammer, if necessary. You\'ll have it by this
time tomorrow. Let\'s say the ID will be ANON and the password will be,
well, how about \'MOLLY\'? Count on it being in place tomorrow. You can
tell your people.\" \"Won\'t it be used for poison-pen messages?\"
Webster asked her, on the way back to his office. \"I mean, that might
be a problem.\" \"Oh, I don\'t think so. There are plenty of other ways
to send such messages, if people want to. What there isn\'t in most
organizations is a clean way to send a truly anonymous message to your
boss. So, bad news that everybody wants to tell and every good boss
wants to know never gets through until it\'s too late. I bet the ANON ID
is practically never used at all. But when it is, it will be
invaluable.\" Upon their return, Belinda asked Waldo to do a little
research on the projects each of their selected managers had run in the
past. What she was mostly interested in was knowing the largest group
that each of them had managed before. Waldo had the list for them in no
time. \"Well, here we see Molly, for example. In her management career,
she has run four projects: three people, five people, five people, and
six people.\" They walked together over to the display wall where they
had earlier pasted up the profile sheets for the first six projects
(eighteen teams). Mr. T. picked up her train of thought: \"She\'ll be
perfect for PMill, the Web Page Designer project, then. We\'ll give her
a staff cf eight or ten developers.\"

\"Mmm,\" Belinda said. \"I\'d rather see her on this one.\" She pointed
to the profile sheet for Quickerstill, the Quicken look-alike project.
It was the smallest of the six projects. In the box for maximum staff
size, they had written \'6.\' She tapped on that number with one big,
blunt finger.\" \"Six? But she\'s already done that. She\'ll want
something more, something to stretch against, to help her grow.\" \"She
will. She certainly will. But we\'ll ask her, as a favor, to do her
growing on the next project. We\'ll ask her to do one time for us what
she has successfully done before for others. We\'ll do that for each
project, ask people to defer for a bit the chance to take on a real
stretch goal, and repeat, just one time, what they already know they can
do successfully. It\'s a trick,Webster,a trick that has never let me
down.\" Belinda left to head back to her spot in the harbor park for the
night, and Mr. T. sat down in his office reading corner, in the
chintz-covered, overstuffed chair that Lahksa had chosen for him. What a
day! Thirty interviews and they had come up with no fewer than five
managers that they both felt comfortable with. This was progress beyond
his wildest hopes. Looking back over his notes, he knew that he\'d never
felt better about any new hires than he did about the five managers they
had just selected. If they could round out the management team now with
others that inspired the same level of confidence, he knew they\'d have
a winning combination. It was already dark outside by the time he stood
up. He was ready for a bath and dinner. But before heading out, he
dutifully sat for a few moments at his desk to write some observations
fiom the day. Most of what he wanted to write

had to do with the hiring process, but there was also Belinda\'s
fascinating insight about Patton as a manager. . . . From Mr.
Tompluns7Journal:

Battle Command As a Metaphor for Manaaement o

By t h e t i m e t h e b a t t l e begins, t h e manager\'s real work is
already done.

Interviews and Hiring o

Hiring involves all t h e managerial body parts: heart, soul, nose, and
g u t (but mostly gut).

o

Don\'t t r y t o do it alone-two g u t s are more than twice a s good a
s one.

o

Ask new hires t o undertake one project a t exactly t h e level o f
competence they have already proved, t o d e f e r real stretch goals
till t h e next time.

o

Ask for pointers: The person you are most inclined t o hire may well
know of other good possibilities.

o

Listen more than you speak.

This last point was something he had picked up from Belinda during the
day. He himself had a terrible tendency to gush on about the new
organization he was building, the project, the nature of the challenges,
or whatever. It was as if he could not bear to be quiet. If the
candidate wasn\'t speaking, Mr. Tomp-

kins felt compelled to fill the silence. Belinda didn\'t. When he did
manage to contain himself and let Belinda direct the interview, she was
prone to allowing long, uncomfortable silences. During this time, she
would sit calmly, loolng at the interview subject. At the end, the
candidate would invariably break and begin to speak. What was said at
such points was almost always the most useful part of the interview. Now
that he looked back at the list in his journal, he saw that it wasn\'t
just the very last item that had come from Belinda, but virtually
everything on the list. Hadn\'t he contributed anything at all to the
process? Well, of course, he had. The night before Belinda\'s arrival,
he had finally worked up the resolve to read through all the resumes.
And then he had sorted the stack into a vague order, with the most
likely candidates at the top of the stack. The list that Waldo later
made up, showing all the candidates\' names and locations, was made &om
the sorted resume pile; it was in the same order. So, he and Belinda had
spent the day talking to the managers that his earlier scan had
indicated were the best bets. He bent down once again over his journal
to add a final item to his points about interviews and hiring:

o

All t h e s e t h i n g s work b e t t e r if you stack the deck.

L a h k s a Hoolihan had a mischievous look in her eye. Since she
behaved mischievously even when she didn\'t look that way,
Mr-Tompkinssuspected trouble. \"I need your approval for what I\'ve just
done, Webster. I\'ve done something rather extraordinary.\" \"Oh, dear.
I can\'t imagine why you need my approval, since you\'ve already done
it.\" \"I just do. Who knows why? I have these moments of needing
approval. So approve, please.\" He shook his head, expecting the worst.
\"Well, I\'ll bite. Tell me what you\'ve done.\" \"Of course. But you
must approve first, then I\'ll tell you.\" \"Lahksa! I can\'t do that.
You\'re asking for a blank check.\" She pouted. \"A. little blank check
of approval. You would deny me that? C\'mon, Webster.\" He stared at
her. What an exasperating woman. She waited patiently for him to approve
before going on. Tompkins gave a long sigh. \"Okay, I approve. Now, what
have you done?\"

She grinned. \"Well. You know as well as I do that this business of
setting up a Project Management Laboratory is something none of us
really knows how to do. We\'re going to run multiple instances of a
project, each one chartered to develop exactly the same piece of
software. By altering some one or maybe a few factors, and then
observing the results, we can hope to learn exactly how such factors
affect project work.\" \"Right .\" \"Only, what are the factors? What
should we vary? What are the controls? What do we conclude? If two
people do a given piece of work faster than four, what does it prove?
That two always do the work faster? Suppose one team goes faster but
introduces more errors, what does that mean? How do we compare their
performance?\" He nodded. \"I\'ve been wondering the same sort of thing.
We have a ton of questions like that. Here we have the chance of a
lifetime to set up some controlled experiments in project management.
But it\'s not as easy as it looks.\" \"It isn\'t. So, we have an unusual
and highly specified need here. We need to know how to do something that
has almost never been done before. How do we do that?\" She pretended to
ponder the problem. Then, her face lit up with pretend revelation.
\"Sounds like a job for a consultant.\" \"I\'ll buy that. But who? Is
there anyone who has ever set up a project laboratory before?\" \"Well,
there is. There is one man who has done just that: Dr. Hector Rizzoli.\"
\"Oh, yes.\" Tompluns certainly knew that name, one of the most
respected in the field. \"Well, that\'s true enough. He has run some
very cleverly controlled experiments to determine, for example, the
usehlness of certain inspection techniques. I

remember reading about that. He ran a kind of software engineering
laboratory for some U.S. Government agency. Did a whole series of
controlled experiments.\" \"The very man.\" \"You\'re a step ahead of
me, Lahksa. I see what you mean. He could be a most usehl consultant for
us. As soon as we began talking about running a set of experiments, our
Project Management Laboratory, I should have asked you to contact Dr.
Rizzoli. I wonder when we could get him here?\" \"Tomorrow afternoon.\"
\"What?!?\" \"Tomorrow afternoon. He\'ll be on the three o\'clock flight
&om New Delhi. We\'ll meet him at the airport.\" Mr. Tompkins was
immediately suspicious. \"Wait a minute. Wait a minute. How does it
happen that\'s he\'s stopping in Morovia tomorrow afternoon? You
haven\'t been up to your old tricks again, have you? Secobarbital and
LSD? You haven\'t kidnapped the poor man?\" A hurt look. \"Webster.
Would I do a thing like that? Certainly not. No, he\'s coming of his own
fiee will.\" Again the look of mischief in her eyes. \"Sort of.\" \"Sort
of? Explain, please.\" \"Well, he\'s coming of his own fiee will, only
he doesn\'t know exactly where he\'s coming to. You see, he thinks he\'s
arriving in Latvia. The Latvian government invited him months ago to a
conference they\'re having in Riga, to give the keynote address. It
worked out fine for him, since he\'s on his way back from India, so he
accepted. And we have arranged for the flight to stop here. He\'ll be so
jet-lagged, he\'ll have no idea where he is. One of our agents is
serving as the stewardess of the flight. She\'ll wake him up and put him
off here.\"

\"This is outrageous.\" \"But the chance of a lifetime . . .\" The next
afternoon, a very sleepy looking Hector Rizzoli stepped off a British
Air flight at the Varsjop airport. Mr. Tompkins and Ms. Hoolihan were
there to meet him. They waited for him under a huge banner that read
\"LATVIA WELCOMES THE EMINENT DR. RIZZOLI.\" Mr. Tompkins approached
him. \"Dr. Rizzoli?\" I guess.\" \"I\'m Webster Tompkins. And this is my
colleague, Ms. Hoolihan.\" The man shook hands and looked around,
somewhat befuddled. \"Palm trees,\" he said. \"I never knew there\'d be
palm trees in Latvia. Isn\'t Latvia in the north?\" \"Not as far north
as you might think,\" Lahksa told him. \"And then there is the effect of
the Humboldt Current,\" Tompkins added helphlly. \"Oh, yes. Humboldt.\"
In spite of the slight deceit they were practicing, Mr.T. was excited to
meet one of the icons of the field. \"This is a great honor, Dr.
Rizzoli. I have long been an admirer of your work.\" Dr. Rizzoli blushed
becomingly. There were crinkle lines around his eyes, implying a ready
smile, which, sure enough, was soon in evidence. His beard was flecked
with gray, but h s thick head of hair was still quite black. There was
about the man an air of solidity; he seemed like the kind of person you
could tell almost anything to, and count on a thoughthl and caring
response. 6L

\"We hope you\'re going to love your stay here in . . .
Latvia,\"Tompkins enthused. \"We have arranged a huge audience for you
tomorrow afternoon, for your keynote. And then a little tour, lunches
and dinners of course, and then I just wondered if you might be
interested in learning about some experiments we\'ll be running.\"
\"Experiments?\" Dr. Rizzoli looked instantly awake. \"What kind of
experiments?\" They had the entire software engineering staff, nearly
fifteen hundred in all, show up for Dr. Rizzoli\'s keynote address. The
speech was a tour de force. At the end, the audience stood and applauded
for what seemed like several minutes. By the time he was allowed to step
down &-omthe podium, Dr. Rizzoli was looking dazed and happy. There was
a reception that followed and then a tour of the town and of its ancient
fortifications, then dinner, then another reception, then a chamber
concert, then brandy out on the terrace with a small group, waiting to
see the moon rise over the valley. There was not a moment during the
day, only his second in Morovia (Latvia),for Dr. Rizzoli to look at the
Project Management Laboratory experiments. But the third day he spent
entirely with Mr. Tompkins and Belinda Binda. By late afternoon, they
had sketched out a series of controlled experiments. Each and every
product was to be constructed three times, by three teams working in
parallel. For each project, they had a single, designated learning goal,
a particular effect that the relative performance of the competing teams
would help to prove or disprove.

Table 8-1. Six Products: Eighteen Projects.

During the evening after their long workday, there was a dinner buffet
and wine-tasting party. \"It seems we\'re tasting exclusively Morovian
wines this evening,\" Dr. Rizzoli observed. \"Part of our \'Wines of the
World\' program,\" Lahksa told him smoothly. \"Today Morovia, tomorrow
Spain or Algeria or Luxembourg, who knows?\" \"What a charming
program,\" Dr. Rizzoli enthused, draining his glass of Zelenike white.
\"I think I like Morovian wines, particularly the whites.\" \"Now you
must try some of the darker ones fiom Bilak andVizi\~ein the east.\" Mr.
Tompkins was becoming something of an expert on Morovian wine. He poured
a glass for his guest. \"Look at the color, almost amber.\"

\* Notes is a registered trademark of International Business Machines,
Inc. PageMill is a registered trademark of Adobe Systems, Inc. Painter
is a registered trademark of Fractal Design Corporation. Photoshop is a
registered trademark ofAdobe Systems, Inc. QuarkXPress is a registered
trademark of Quark, Inc. Quicken is a registered trademark of Intuit,
Inc.

Dr. Rizzoli tasted the clear, dark wine. \"Mmm. Nutty and delicious.
Now that is a wine. I think I might like to go to Morovia one day.
Wonder what it would be like.\" \"Bit like this, I should think,\"
Tompluns told him. \"Pretty scenery, nice people, and, of course, lots
of splendid wine.\" The wine party was being held on the ground floor
and garden of the Residence building where Mr.Tompkins had his private
suite upstairs. Dr. Rizzoli, too, was staying at the Residence, so when
the evening was wearing down they had only to climb the ornate staircase
to find their way to their rooms. They each took a glass of Mogradec
Tokay, an elegant pale orange dessert wine, for the trip up. As
sometimes happens with two gentlemen in their cups, they stopped for a
chat partway up the stairs. And an hour later, they were still there,
seated side-by-side on the plush burgundy stair runner, talking shop.
\"You know, Hector, we\'ve talked so much about the controls and the
learning goals for the projects, I almost think we\'ve forgotten to tell
you that the projects are not just experiments. I mean, they really do
need to produce something in a timely way, s o h a r e products of
extremely high quality.\" \"Not a pure experiment, perhaps, but still a
marvelous opportunity to learn important things about the dynamics of
projects.\" \"Oh, yes. But there are also the dynamics of my job to
think about. We could learn lots of things and not deliver anything, in
which case my stewardship would have to be judged a failure. Or, we
could learn nothing but deliver six stupendous software products, in
which case, strictly from a job point of view, I would be judged a
success.\" \"And you want to be a success in both of these respects.\"
\"Exactly.\" \"Exactly. Just as I would.\"

\"We want to learn from a few interim failures perhaps, but mostly from
our ultimate successes.\" Dr. Rizzoli nodded. \"Well, just for starters,
I suspect that the very fact of the experiments you\'re running can only
help ultimate project results. How can you go wrong running three copies
of a project in parallel and then selecting the one that finishes first
and best as your product? It\'s a luxury that most organizations can\'t
afford. The little competitive goad that will exist between the teams is
a fair reminder of the competition that the products will face fiom the
exterior; it can only help to keep the developers focused.\" \"Yes, I\'m
aware of that. But now here\'s the thing: I have sitting opposite me
none other than the world-famous Dr. Hector Rizzoli, a man who has made
his name as a master of most of the science of software building, a man
who has published literally hundreds of scholarly papers, plus articles,
books, tutorials. . . .\" \"Mmm. I have been accused of being a man who
has never had an unpublished thought.\" \"I\'d like to meet the boor who
would say such a thing!\" \"Well, I suspect it was a compliment,
actually.\" \"I should hope so. Anyway, here I find myself in a private
moment with the eminent Dr. Rizzoli. I\'d be crazy not to ask you for
some advice. Tell me, Hector, What should I do to give the projects
their very best chance of success? What would you do if you were in my
place? What one thing?\" Hector let his eyes wander out over the wide
stairwell. \"One thing. That\'s a tough question.\" \"Should I focus on
process improvement? You know the folks at our Software Engineering
Institute are trylng to convince me that a take-no-prisoners process
improvement program to move the entire staff &om CMM Level 2 to Level 3
is

the best thing I can do to help the organization. Is that what you
would do?\" \"That\'s an easy one. No.\"

\"Ah.\" \"Process improvement in the abstract is always a good thing. It
means you get better and better at doing your job. But I am less
enthusiastic about process improvement programs like the CMM. They
sometimes become an end in themselves.\" \"But there must be something I
can do, some short-term fix that will improve productivity,for example,
. . .\" Hector shook his head energetically. \"There is no such thing as
a short-term fix in our business. There is never a way to improve
productivity in the short term. When you\'re all done, the productivity
you will achieve will be the direct result of the long-term investment
made by those before you. And the only real impact you can have on
productivity is to make a long-term investment now to benefit your
successors.\" Mr.Tompkins sighed. \"I think I knew that. It\'s
refkeshing, nonetheless, to hear it stated so bluntly.\" \"The cold slap
of reality on the subject of productivity improvement.\" \"Thanks, I
needed that.\" An observant waiter from downstairs arrived with two more
glasses of the orange Tokay. Hector and Webster accepted the glasses and
sipped thoughtfblly. \"So, what would you do, Hector? What one thing?\"
\"Since there really isn\'t anything you can do to change productivity,
at least not in the short term, I think you have to focus entirely on
avoiding wasted time. If you assume a fixed production rate during
effective work hours, then the only real variable you have to play with
is the proportion of work

hours that are effective. So, you concentrate on reducing the
proportion of ineffective ones.\" \"I see that. So, I look for the
sources of wasted time and rout them out of the workday.\" \"Yes, that
couldn\'t hurt. But it won\'t help too much either, since people are
always trying to perform such basic hygiene themselves, just to avoid
their own fi-ustration. The result is that you won\'t find huge
opportunity for systemic improvement in the number of effective hours in
the workday. Some, but not a lot.\" \"So, what nonsystemic waste do I
look for?\'\' \"Well, consider what happens when something goes wrong on
a project. A risk materializes: Before it had just been a possibility,
and now it\'s a reality, a problem.\" Mr. Tompkins nodded. \"Something
like a piece of hardware that was on the critical path doesn\'t get
delivered on time? Something like that?\" \"Exactly. Or a key piece of
critical path development finishes late, just because the time allocated
for it was too little. So, people are inconvenienced, work gets pushed
off, some people are idled because they can\'t go ahead on the next task
until the critical path contingencies have been satisfied. What do you
do now?\" \"Well, I guess I would think of trimming functionality from
the product. That might relax the critical path and it might also help
us make up time in the work that remains.\" \"Okay. So you trim. That
too suggests waste, since it\'s probably pretty late to be doing the
trimming. After all, some work has already been applied to the very
functions you are now trimming.\" I see.\" \"Waste, waste, waste. Waste
and risk, I think, are always tied hand-in-hand. The real wasted effort
of project work, the 6C

huge wastes that really set you back, are always a direct result of a
risk materiahzing. So, the one thing I would do is to manage the risks.
I would manage each project by managing the risks faced by that project.
Software development is a risky business and managing that business is,
most of all, an exercise in risk management.\" \"Most of my projects, of
course, have the same risks: They might come home late or cost too
much.\" \"Well, those are your ultimate risks, the ultimate undesirable
outcomes, but those aren\'t the ones I\'m talking about. The risks you
have to manage are the causals, the things that might cause such
ultimate failure. So, you don\'t just have a few big end-result risks,
but lots of smaller, causal ones.\" Mr. Tompkins chewed it over.
\"Manage a project as an exercise in managing the causal risks. I like
that. S o b a r e development is a risky business and what are you
managing if not the risks? I like that idea, . . . at least, I like it
in the abstract. But I\'m still not sure what it means in the specific.
How do I know if I am really managing the causal risks?\" \"Think about
it backwards. How would someone prove that you hadn\'t managed risks?
Imagine that you\'re being dragged into court and accused of not doing
sensible risk management. What would they have to prove against you?\"
\"Well, I guess, that I didn\'t maintain a census of risks, that would
be one thing.\" \"Or that you didn\'t assess each identified risk as to
its probability of materializing and its likely cost if it did
materialize.\" \"Or that I didn\'t set up a mechanism to detect
materialization when it happened.\" \"That\'s a good one. There is
always some earliest indication that a risk is actually in
transition-becoming a

problem\--so you need to figure out what that earliest indicator will
be and watch for it like a hawk.\" \"Maybe appoint some person to be the
hawk, a kind of risk officer.\" \"Yes. Finally, I think it would be very
damning in court if the prosecution could prove that you had not set up
mechanisms for people to tell you when bad news was happening. Or worse,
that you inhibited the flow of bad news by establishing a culture of
fear, where people were afraid to tell you whatever you so plainly
didn\'t want to hear.\" \"I wouldn\'t do that, of course,\" Mr.Tompkins
assured him. c\< No, not on purpose. No good manager would. But you may
be so successful in instilling a Can-Do attitude in your people that
they are inhibited fi-om telling you an important piece of Can\'t-Do
information.\" \"That isn\'t exactly a \'culture of fear,\' but . . .\"
\"But it has a similar effect.\" \"I see that.\" \"So that is my \'one
thing,\' then. I would manage the projects by managing their risks.\"
Dr. Rizzoli was planning to be off on the first morning plane. He would
leave none the wiser for where he had spent the last few days. (Someday,
Mr. Tompkins was going to have to come clean about that with his new
fi-iend.) By tomorrow, all the stirring words exchanged on the stair
might be lost in a post-alcoholic haze. Mr.T. had a hunch that he
wasn\'t going to remember much of anything by morning. So, instead of
going directly to bed, he now made himself sit down at his writing desk
and commit Dr. Rizzoli\'s advice to black and white.

From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal: Productivity Improvement o

There is no such thing a s a short-term productivity fix.

o

Productivity improvement comes from long-term investment.

o

Anything t h a t promises immediate term results is likely t o be snake
oil.

Risk Manaaement o

Manage projects by managing t h e i r risks.

o

Create and maintain a census o f risks for each project.

o

Track t h e causal risks, n o t j u s t t h e ultimate undesirable
outcomes.

o

Assess each risk f o r probability and likely cost.

o

Predict, f o r each risk, t h e e a r l i e s t symptom t h a t might
indicate materialization.

o

Appoint a risk officer, one person who is n o t expected t o maintain a
Can-Do attitude.

o

Establish easy (perhaps anonymous) channels for bad news t o be
communicated up t h e hierarchy.

S

ince N\'NL was in town for the day, Belinda suggested that they press
him into service. There were still dozens of interviews to be conducted.
The man obviously had some experience in hiring software managers,
Belinda observed, so why not let hlm take part? They would conduct
interviews as a team of three. Even more important, they could break up
and work singly, interviewing some of the lowest-level people to get
their take on those who managed them. With three of them, that part of
the work would go faster. The man who fashioned himself as Morovia\'s
\'tyrant\' was not only willing to get involved in the interviews, he
was positively enthusiastic. Mr. Tompkins had the sense that NNL was
bored to tears with the tyrant business and itchy to do something more
in line with his real skllls. He turned up for the interviews wearing a
disguise: a pair of dark-rimmed glasses with a false nose, bushy black
eyebrows, and a mustache attached. He introduced himself at each
interview as \"Mr. Lider.\"

A young manager was telling them,\"Management shmanagement. You
wouldn\'t be hiring me as the manager, but the team that works for me.
They are the best. They have worked under me for two years and with each
other for two years before that. I acquired them as an integral team.
Believe me, anybody could manage these people.\" \"Hire him,\" Mr. Lider
said. Mr. T. looked down at his watch. The interview had only begun two
minutes ago. He was beginning to suspect that he was the only one who
ever agonized over a hiring decision. Certainly, NNL and Belinda Binda
weren\'t inclined to. Oh, well, the candidate seemed like a winner to
Tompkins, too. He got the fellow\'s name and copied it down on the
clipboard. \"Respect for the team is always a good sign in a manager,\"
NNL told them later, over coffee. \"But you have to be a bit careful on
this one, because it\'s politically correct in most organizations today
to be pro-team. Some of the most flowery praise you hear on the subject
of teams is only hypocrisy. Managers learn to talk a good game about
teams even when they\'re secretly threatened by the whole concept.\"
\"Who could admit to being anti-team or anti-teamwork?\"Belinda added.
NNL was nodding. \"But some managers are. Deep down inside, they\'re
threatened by a tight little workgroup that seems elitist, exclusionary,
. . .\" \"Sometimes, even excluding the manager herself,\"Belinda picked
up. \"I\'ve managed teams that made it ever so clear that I wasn\'t a
team member. That hurt at the time, but it was also realistic. Teams are
made up of peers, and the manager is dif-

ferent-less tightly connected to the work \'details and more of an
authority figure. Anyway, definitely not a peer.\" Mr.T. was waiting for
a chance to get a word in. \"But our young friend in the last interview
was not just mouthing politically correct things. He really meant it.
The proof was that he had acquired an already formed team and kept it
together. Someone who was secretly threatened by tight teams wouldn\'t
have touched that . . .\" \"Or would probably have broken it up,\" NNL
added. \"Breaking up teams is a sore spot with \*me. Some companies even
have a formal policy about that. They break up teams as a matter of
principle as soon as each project is done. What a dumb idea! To my mind,
a well-knit team ought to be declared as one of the major project
deliverables. So you\'re judged at the end, not just by the s o h a r e
you produce but also by being able to provide at least one good solid
team that is willing and eager to do another project together.\"
\"Well,\" Mr. Tompkins said after a moment. \"We\'re obviously too much
agreed on this subject to have a good argument. Who\'s our next
interview?\" Belinda looked down at the list. \"Fellow named Gabriel
Markov.\" \"Oh, yes,\" NNL said. \"That would be ex-General Markov.\"
\"A general?\" That seemed odd to Belinda. \"One of the generals. Before
I came along, he was one of the ruling council of Morovia. So, he was
one of the ones who was deposed by my coup. By the coup, that is, and a
few million in stock and options.\" Mr.T. objected: \"But I thought you
said all the Morovian generals had gone off to the Riviera to live it up
on their new-found wealth.\"

\"They did, all but ex-General Markov. He asked me if he could stay on
and become a s o h a r e manager. I can\'t imagine why he would want to
work when he\'s got all that money.\" \"Look who\'s talking!\" Belinda
said pointedly. Conventional estimates were that NNL was worth a few
billion. \"Oh. Well, my case is a bit different,\" NNL told them. \"I\'m
building a new house. You can\'t imagine what plumbers and carpenters
and electricians are charging these days. Everything costs a fortune!\"
Belinda and Webster tried to look sympathetic. \"Anyway,\" NNL went on,
\"the ex-General had been in charge of software development in the Army,
so he knew something about the subject. He has some pretty impressive
credentials, but he is really more an administrator than a manager.\"
\"Don\'t knock it,\" Belinda said. \"We\'ve got a ton of people on our
hands. We could use a good administrator.\" \"Just what I thought,\" NNL
agreed. \"I\'ve already put him in charge of everybody who is not
assigned to one of our new lead projects. Ex-General Markov runs the
rest of the organization. Everyone that we don\'t decide to put on one
of the shrink-wrap software product efforts ends up working for him. He
is, so to speak, our pool manager.\" That worried Mr. Tompkins. \"So
each person and each team we do choose for one of the new projects is
effectively removed fi-om his domain. Isn\'t he going to be made
uncomfortable by that?\" \"I don\'t think SO,\" NNL said. \"He really
has no idea what to do with the people he\'s got.\" \"What on earth are
they doing?\" Belinda asked. \"They all seem to be working on something,
building software, producing designs, testing modules, writing
documentation. But

I

you tell us they\'re also all available. I\'d be fascinated to know just
what the ex-General has got them all assigned to do.\" As soon as they
were assembled in Gabriel Markov\'s office, Belinda put her question to
him: \"What are they up to, all these people who work for you?\" \"Most
of them are building software for the Morovian Central Planning
Office,\" the ex-General told them. He was a large, extremely fit man,
who seemed still to be in uniform, even dressed as he was in a business
suit. He had one gold tooth in front. Because he smiled almost
constantly, the gold tooth was always in evidence. Now the smile was
slightly sad. \"I haven\'t the heart to tell them.\" \"Tell them what?\"
Tompkins asked. \"Tell them that the Morovian Central Planning Office
has been abolished. It was a decision made by Himself.\" At this he
winked and grinned broadly and pointed toward Mr. Lider in his false
mustache. \"Why, that\'s awfd,\"Tompkins said. \"All those people are
doing useless work.\" \"But only temporarily,\" the ex-General hastened
to assure them. \"We have already made contact with offshore agencies in
the U.S. and Great Britain. I assure you, that by this time next year,
we shall have them all busy doing contract work, at least all the ones
you don\'t choose for the shrink-wrap software projects.\" That came as
a surprise to NNL. \"I didn\'t know you were doing that, Gabriel,
looking for offshore work.\" \"Well, I thought it made sense. And there
is plenty of market out there. True, there was no great pressure to have
them generate revenue, since their present salary level is still

small by international standards. We could just keep them at busy work
until we need them ourselves, manage them like a huge pool of available
labor. Only it all seems so pointless. Even if there were still a
Central Planning Office, the work would still be fairly pointless:
endless automation of bloated, useless bureaucracy. To keep the morale
up, I needed to find real, meaningful work for them.\" Belinda changed
the subject: \"What is the largest group you have ever managed?\"
\"Thirteen thousand five hundred seventy-one people, the combined
Morovian first and second Armies and the Air Force,\" the ex-General
answered her promptly. \"One hundred ninety-one rnilhon U.S. dollars in
annual budget, eight hundred fifty-three million in capital investment,
six hundred eighty-eight in officer-level staff including nine general
officers, three hundred sixty-two in support staff, seventy-two thousand
square meters of interior space, and a little more than eleven hundred
square kilometers of bases and stations, five hundred nine in technical
staff, including three hundred eighty-eight programmers, systems
analysts, and designers.\" \"Oh,\" Belinda said. \"Well,\"Tompkins
observed after a moment. \"I think that is certainly a qualification for
running our staff. Does that job appeal to you?\" The ex-General was
smiling again. \"It does. I am something of a novice at the technology,
but I am also a great believer in it. I think the fkture is in
information, in processing it to make knowledge and in moving it around
via networks to get the knowledge to its market. That is the great
revolution that is upon us. And I want to be part of it. It would be an
honor to work for you and with you, the three of you, and to learn
&-omand teach each other.\"

There was another silence after he spoke. The man\'s sincerity and
warmth were palpable. Tompkins was marveling at how good it felt to hear
what he had just heard. Belinda, on the other hand, was still marveling
at the numbers. \"You know, Mr. ex-General, I have never managed even a
tenth of the number of people you had. Give us the benefit of some of
your insight. What did you learn from all your experience? Pick
something and tell us about it.\" Ex-General Markov looked thoughtful.
His eyes became unfocused. After a moment he began, \"The lesson you
never stop learning is to cut your losses. When you\'re doing something
valuable, there is always a lot of associated risk, always the chance
that the effort will be a failure. This is particularly true of software
work. Look at the number of projects that never deliver anything, or
that are canceled, or that deliver a product that turns out to be
useless. Maybe a quarter of all projects, at least of the big ones, are
in that category. \"If you judge your performance based entirely on how
well you run the projects that eventually do succeed, you get a false
picture. You also have to watch how well you contain the failure rate,
and how quickly you cut the failing efforts off. That is the biggest and
hardest lesson I have ever learned.\" The staff that was shaping up was
impressive, but still h l l of unknowns. In his prior positions, Mr.
Tompkins had always had at least a few known quantities to depend upon,
people he\'d worked with for five or ten or even fifteen years. The new
faces on his Morovian management team all looked good, but he still had
to wonder what his impression would be of them a few years fiom now.
Still, it was hard to repress his optimism. The ex-General, in
particular, was a welcome addi-

tion. He had the sense that this likable and intelligent man would
always be able to supply a good complement to his own thinking. Most of
all, it was a relief to know that the pool of some thirteen hundred and
fifty of his people who would not be working on the six key products
were in good hands under the ex-General. Tompkins looked up at the new
org chart that he and Belinda had put up on the white board in the late
afternoon:

He had seven direct reports: Ex-General Markov and the six product
managers who were responsible for delivering products to compete
directly with Quicken, QuarkXpress, Photoshop, Painter, Lotus Notes, and
PageMill, respectively. Under each product manager was an A-Team, a
B-Team, and a CTeam, the three separate units competing to produce the
best product fastest.

He was still looking for eight key people, including one of the direct
reports. He would use the ex-General as a sounding board when he needed
an experienced administrator\'s opinion, and other than that just treat
him as manager of a human resource pool. The ex-General would be fiee to
take on offshore contract work as he thought best, only promising to
give first priority for people requisitioned by the six product areas.
Not perfect yet-he was still worrying about that key open slot right
under him-but they certainly had come a long way in one short week.
Eleven of the eighteen workgroups were staffed and started. Belinda said
she felt positively high about their progress so far, and he was coming
to depend on her gut for an overall indication of his ultimate prospects
for success. He might have let his own expectations be as optimistic as
hers but for the grim reminder of the countdown display on the board
just beside the new org chart. He had instructed Waldo to put it up and
to decrement it each day. The display now read:

ONLY

DAYS TILL D-DAY!

Allowing for weekends and holidays, that left fewer than five hundred
workdays left before the end of his contract. That was almost certainly
not enough for a big product like PShop (and he still had no manager for
the PShop B-Team!). So far, there were no deadlines set; he had been
adamant that no schedules were to be handed down on him fiom above. But
really, who was he kidding? Everyone expected the six products, or at
least most of them, to be delivered before he was done. So, in spite of
all his determination not to let it happen,

here was another highly aggressive deadline staring him in the face.
Seven hundred and five days left. . . . He picked up his bound leather
book and his pen. From Mr.Tompkins7Journal:

Plaving Defense o

Cut your losses.

o

You can improve overall performance more by containing your failures
than by optimizing your successes.

o

Be aggressive about canceling failed efforts early.

o

Don\'t take chances on team jell if you don\'t have to: seek out and use
preformed teams.

o

Keep good t e a m s t o g e t h e r (when zhey\'re willing) t o help
your successors avoid problems of slow-jelling or nonjelling teams.

o

Think o f a jelled team- ready and willing t o take on a new effort-as
one of the project deliverables.

o

A day lost a t the beginning of a project hurts j u s t a s much a s a
day lost a t t h e end.

That last one had come &om Belinda, something she said at some point
nearly every morning. He looked up one last time at Waldo\'s countdown
sign. When he came in tomorrow,

it would already be adjusted to 704. Had the seven hundred and fifth
day been made to count as much as he might have hoped? Or would he
eventually come to see it as just another dropped opportunity? Time
would tell. He looked back down at the journal and added one final point
on defensive management, something he had come to reahze years ago and
now was facing up to again:

o

There are infinitely many ways to lose a . b u t n o t even one way t o
g e t day one back.

..

M

r\. Tompkins was in Rome for a bit of essential business and perhaps a
little R&R as well. With all the projects now M y staffed and working
effectively, he could afford to attend to a matter that had been nagging
him. At the fiont desk of the Hassler Hotel, he slid his new corporate
American Express card across to the clerk. The man puzzled over the
inscription. \"Morovianze Naczonal Byru av Data Schmertczung,\" he read.
\"That would be the Morovian National Bureau of Data . . .\"
\"Schmertzing,\"Mr.Tompkins helped him out. \"Ah, data schmertzing.
That\'s what it means in English. Um . . .You wouldn\'t happen to know
the Italian word for \'schmertzing,\' would you?\"
\"Shmerziazione?\"Tompkins offered. \"Ah. Well, welcome to Rome, Mr.
Tompkins. Welcome to the Hassler.\" \"Thank you.\" A few moments later,
he was being shown into a comfortable apartment with splendid views out
over the Spanish

Steps. As soon as the porter was gone, Mr.T. set up his Powerbook on
the desk, plugged it into the hotel phone jack, and sent out a two-page
fax to a number in NewYork. He was awakened the next day around 7 A.M.
by a call fiom the lawyer, Spofford. \"Webster! Rise and shine,Webster.
It\'s me!\" \"Hello,Jack.\" \"Hello, indeed. I got your fax. I\'ve been
on the phone all day, and I dropped by in the late afternoon at the main
Fidelity office here on Wall Street. Had a chat with Ms. Lampool, just
as you told me to. She was all ready for me. Most cooperative. Said that
you had supplied all the proper notices and releases to enable me to act
as your agent.\" \"Good.\" \"We checked out your account and compared it
to the screen dump you included in your fax, the image you accessed
on-line firom Morovia.\" \"And . . . ?\" \"And they checked out
perfectly. You\'re definitely getting through to Fidelity and you\'re
definitely accessing your own account. We saw no sign of tampering.\"
\"I just worried that . . .\" \" . . . that your KVJ friends might be up
to pulling shenanigans. I know. Well, breathe a sigh of relief. They
haven\'t .\" Mr. Tompkins breathed a sigh of relief. \"So, the money
really is there. They really did deposit it as a lump sum.\" \<c To the
penny, just as promised. It even arrived a day earlier than they said.\"

\"Good. Thank you for that,Jack. And you set up the new accounts and
made the transfers?\" \"As you specified. The old account is closed and
the new ones are set up to hold the hnds. The access passwords are the
ones you asked for in your fax. But, of course, you\'re going to change
those, aren\'t you?\" \"Of course.\" \"And don\'t forget to keep the
passwords in your head, not in your computer. Otherwise, those rascally
Morovians might be able to get their money back just by grabbing your
laptop. You had already thought of that, though, hadn\'t you.\" \"Of
course.\" The truth was that it had never crossed his mind. He would
have to remove all the passwords &-omthe access programs and memorize
them. Jack was moving on. \"Good. So, I think that\'s it. Your money is
in and you\'re definitely secure on this end. Oh, one more thing.\"
\"Yes, Jack?\" \"Turn your mind back to last summer, to the party I
attended at your house. Remember the elderly gentleman you introduced me
to that day,Johnny . . . ?\" \"Johnny Jay, my old boss. Yes, I certainly
remember him. Too bad he retired. If he had stayed on, I\'d still be
there, still working for him, the best boss a person could ask for.\"
\"He is a real gentleman.\" \"You know, Jack, I think about him almost
every day. I sometimes believe my whole life as a manager is an attempt
to discover and intellectualize the management wisdom that that man had
in his bones. I think he was the best. It was a privilege to work with
him.\" \"Well, the feeling is, apparently, mutual. I saw him here in
NewYork last Saturday evening. . . .\"

\"No. Really?\" \"Really. He and his wife were at the opera at Lincoln
Center. He came up to us at the intermission and we chatted, mostly
about you. He was already in the know about your Morovian escapade.\"
\"The old son of a gun. How is he?\" \"Fit as a fiddle. They both are.
They were to set off sailing the next morning, headed for Martha\'s
Vineyard and points beyond, maybe up to Maine. He asked me how he could
have someone get in touch with you. He told me he had a young fellow
that you really need to get to know. Asked me how you could be reached.
I said I didn\'t have a number for you in Varsjop, but that you would be
staying at the Hassler in Rome today and tomorrow.\" \"Anyone Johnny
wants me to talk to is someone I\'m more than willing to hear out. So,
I\'ll be getting a call here?\" \"No, I think the guy is coming in
person to see you. Johnny said he was in Europe around the same time.
His name is .. .\" \"Wait, I\'m getting a pen. Okay.\" \"His name is
Abdul Jamid.\" Mr.Tompkins tromped around ruins and fountains for most
of the morning, enjoying the delicious, cool weather and a fine lunch
near thevilla Borghese. By the time he got back to the hotel, it was
almost three. \"Mr. Tompkins, I believe.\" A dark, astonishingly
handsome man approached him. He looked like a young Omar Shariff. \"Yes,
that\'s me,\" Mr.T. told him. \"Or I. I\'m him.\" \"I am Dr. Jamid. Your
fiiend Mr.Jay . . .\"

\"Oh, yes. Dr. Jamid. This is an honor. The name of Johnny Jay is an
instant key to my attention. Anyone he recommends . . . well, I\'m
delighted to meet you.\" \"You are too kind.\" \"Not at all. Mr. Jay
wanted us to meet, and I\'m quite looking forward to it. Any idea of
what he wanted us to meet about?\" \"My work. I have done a piece of
work on management dynamics, and when I showed it to Johnny, he thought
of you. He thought it might come in handy in your new position.\" Mr.
Tompkins nodded. \"Johnny was always on the lookout to do someone a good
turn, in this case, two someones, I suspect. I would be delighted to
learn about your work, Dr. Jamid. I am here for two more days. Will that
be enough?\" For a beginning, yes.\" \"Well, on with the beginning,
then.\" He offered his hand. \"Webster.\" \"Abdul.\" They shook hands
solemnly. Webster showed him up the stairs and into the little parlor
adjacent to his bedroom. 66

A few hours later, Mr. Tompkins pulled back from the display of Dr.
Jamid\'s laptop Mac. His head was spinning. \"Time out. Time out. I\'m
on overload here. You keep talking about my hunch base. . . .\" \"The
set of all the hunches that you use to run your project.\" \"I
understand, but you talk about hunches in a way I have never heard
before. You talk about a hunch as though it were a little database and a
program inside my gut. The program

looks at the data and comes up with an answer. Is that really the way
hunches work?\" \"Well? Isn\'t it?\" \"Well, more or less, I suppose. I
mean, there is definitely data in there, that\'s the sum of my
experience to date. And I suppose there are some algorithms as well that
tell me what sense to make of the data.\" \"Precisely.\" \"But, you\'re
telling me to make an explicit model of my hunches about how project
work proceeds and then use that model to simulate the results.\"
\"Right.\" \"But why would I want to do that? Why can\'t I keep my
hunches in my head or my gut or wherever? Seems to me that\'s where
hunches belong.\" \"Well, you could, but then you don\'t have a good
mechanism to improve your hunches. If you believe that the best managers
are the ones with the best hunch bases, the ones whose \'gut feel,\' as
you put it, is most often on target, then you must care about improving
your ability to make your hunches be accurate predictions of reality.\"
\"Of course, but how does the modeling help?\" \"It gives you a nice
clean way to make pictures of your theories about how the work is
actually going to get done. And then you track the actual results back
against the model to learn what you need to improve. If you have a
colleague who has also got a good hunch base . . .\" \"I certainly have
that. Her name is Belinda.\'\' \"Then, you can work over these models
together and learn from each other. Without the model, all you have is a
vague sense in your stomach that, for example, a project is going to be
inefticient due to adding staff too quickly. It\'s

entirely interior. You feel it, and maybe I feel it or Belinda feels
it, but we don\'t have a way to discuss it among ourselves. Maybe
Belinda is, in some sense, twice as uneasy about it as you are, but
we\'re not even likely to understand that, since we don\'t typically
quantify the vague senses in our stomach. When we produce a hunch model,
on the other hand, we have an eloquently expressed theory of how useful
production is affected by the rate at which staff is added.\" Mr.
Tompkins laughed, uneasily. \"Even if it\'s eloquent, it may still not
be right.\" So true. It\'s just a theory. But now we have a mechanical
way to test the theory out, by comparing it to what actually happens.
And in the interim, we have an excellent vehicle for you and Belinda to
use to address your differing senses of the thing and try to combine
your gut-level wisdom.\" \"Well, let\'s say I buy that idea. I\'m going
to want to see some examples of it in use, but let\'s say I like your
concept of modeling hunches, just to get them out in the light of day. I
still don\'t see why I\'d ever want to run the model through a simulator
to see a precise calculation of its results. Isn\'t that overkill?\"
\"If you only had one hunch, you\'d be right. But suppose you have half
a dozen of them. How do you figure \'out what their aggregate effect
is?\" Mr. Tompkins still wasn\'t convinced. \"The simulator figures out
the aggregate, that\'s what you\'re saying. Big deal. Since the input to
the simulator would only be my hunches anyway, how can the simulation\'s
prediction of the aggregate effect of them be any better than my hunch
about the aggregate?\" Dr. Jarnid nodded. \"You think you\'re quite
capable of figuring how the various effects combine? You\'re capable of
66

doing that rather computational task in the entirely non-computational
processor where your hunches reside. You\'ve variously referred to that
hunch processor as your head, your gut, and several times, your bones.
Do you do accurate calculations in your bones,Webster?\" \"Well . . .\"
\"Let\'s try you out. We\'ll try a little example from the literature of
simulation modeling. Suppose you\'re running a project with one hundred
people on board as of January first. They\'ve been there for a couple of
years and you have observed a consistent personnel quit rate of four
people a month. Every time one quits, you hire a replacement
irnmediately and train him or her for two months, after which the new
person is integrated onto the project.\" \"Okay.\" Now you learn, or you
suspect, that the quit rate is going to go up as a result of some new
personnel policy that\'s being instituted on May first. Let\'s say you
figure it will double.\" \"Okay We\'re now expecting to lose eight a
month.\" \"Right. What\'s your hunch about how many people you\'ll have
f d y integrated into the project as ofAugust first?\" \"Huh? Isn\'t it
a hundred?\" \"Is it?\" \"I thought you said I had a steady state of one
hundred people. And I hire one person immediately for each one that is
lost. So, I\'ve always got a hundred in total staff. I train the new
hires. . . . Oh, wait a minute, I see what you mean. There are always
some people in the training loop. And now I have more people in training
on average.\" He thought for a moment. \"Well, certainly, the very first
month, I have some decrease in integrated staff due to the sudden bump
in loss rate, so that month I am down from one hundred to ninetytwo. But
then, don\'t I get them back? I think I do, don\'t I? 66

As to whether I\'m back up to a hundred by August, well . . . Okay, I
don\'t know. The arithmetic processor in my gut is not up to this
example.\" \"But it\'s a trivial example, Webster, utterly trivial. Far
less complicated than the kind of simulation you are trying to do in
your bones nearly every day. Here, let\'s see what the simulator has to
say about this particular example.\" Dr. Jamid began drawing a model on
the screen.\* \"I use a rectangular \'reservoir\' to stand for your
usable staff. The higher the level, the more people you\'ve got. We\'ll
set its initial value to one hundred.

Usable Staff

\"That\'s already a model, but it\'s not very dynamic, since there are
no flows of people leaving the project or new hires coming on board. If
we ran the simulator, it would tell us that the staff level stays
constant at one hundred over time. \"Next, we add a pipeline for the
flow of people out of the project and a valve on the pipe whose value
determines how rapidly they leave. We set the valve initially to a rate
of four people per month.

\* Dr.Jamid\'s example is borrowed from Introduction to Systems Thinking
and ithink (Hanover, N.H.: High Performance Systems, Inc., 1994),pp.
17-18. Used with permission.

Usable 9uff

\"The little cloud icon indicates that when they leave, they pass out of
the context of our model. Finally, we add a pipeline of new people
coming onto the project through a Hiring Rate valve. Let\'s just connect
the setting of the inflow valve directly to the outflow valve, so
however many people we lose in a given month, we just hire exactly that
number back. We place a two-month training delay between the hiring
valve and the flow into the project. So, here we see our resultant
model:

Stuff in Training

Usable Stuff

\"To add our hunch about a sudden bump in Quit Rate starting in May, we
set up an equation for the Quit Rate valve, keeping it at four people
per month up till May, and then increasing it in a step function to
eight people per month. Select RUN to see the simulation results.\" Mr.
Tompkins watched in fascination as the animated display showed the
reservoir rate changing over time. When it had stabilized, Dr. Jamid
stopped the run and, with a few

He wasn\'t entirely sure, but he was beginning to suspect that the
models and simulation might be of use. He turned back to his new fiiend.
\"Let\'s say I\'m entirely persuaded by what you\'ve described, Abdul.
What would you have me do? How would I start to make use of what you
have shared with me today?\" \"Well, we pick some element of your hunch
base. An easy way to ferret out a strong managerial hunch fiom your base
is to challenge it a bit. So, I\'m going to say some outrageous things
and then interrogate you a bit as to why you find them outrage\~us.\'\~
\"Okay, go for it.\" \"Suppose I\'m your boss. You tell me that ten
people working for a year can get a given piece of work done. But I\'m
impatient for the product, so I tell you to use twenty people and get it
to me six months &-omnow.\" Mr. Tompkins could not keep his expression
from clouding up. \"I\'d tell you to go jump in a lake.\" \"You have a
hunch that twenty people for six months is not the same as ten for
twelve months.\" \"It\'s more than a hunch,\'\' Mr. T. sputtered.
\"It\'s a conviction.\" Dr. Jarnid picked up a yellow pad and sketched
quickly on it. When he was done, he shoved the pad over to Mr.Tompkins
and pointed to it.

\"So these two manpower loading schemes can\'t be expected to get the
same amount of useful work done?\" \"Absolutely not!\" \"The total
production capacity of the one is different &om the other?\" \"Quite
different.\" Dr. Jamid now looked slightly cagey. \"Um . . . how
different?\" \"Excuse me?\" \"How different are they? Let\'s assume ten
people for a year can build a s o h a r e product of size one thousand
something-or-others, for example. Don\'t worry about my size units for
the time being, just assume I\'ve got some reasonable way to size
software. If the ten can complete a thousand-unit product in a year, how
big a product could we expect the equally capable people-to
twenty-person team-ssurning develop in six months?\" \"Less than one
thousand.\" \"How much less?\" \"A lot less!\" \"How much is a lot?\"
\"Tons. Those twenty people are falling all over themselves. They
aren\'t going to be able to do nearly as much work as the smaller team
over a longer period of time.\" Mr. Tompkins was becoming exasperated.
\"Can\'t you see that?\" \"Oh, I can. Definitely. I\'m not disagreeing
with your hunch, Webster, only trying to get you to quantifjr it. How
much less will the larger team accomplish in six months?\" Mr. Tompkins
threw his hands up. \"Half. Or even a quarter. I don\'t know.\" \"No
kidding.\" Dr. Jamid was laughing gently. \"Well, I guess I don\'t know.
I mean, not exactly.\" \"Even within a factor of two.\"

\"Why is that so hnny?\" \"Because you need to know. The trade-off
between people and time is something that concerns the manager nearly
every day. You\'re always making such trade-offs. How do you do it?\"
\"Well, I guess I have a feel for it.\" \"That feel is your model. You
see, you\'ve already got a model, but just now, it\'s entirely internal.
It\'s so deeply buried that even you can\'t just look at it when you
want to. Let\'s bring it out into the open. Let\'s recreate in the form
of a model your \'feel\' for how adding people to a team affects the
team production rate.\'\' \"Okay.\" \"Just talk to me about it, and I
will reduce it to terms that the modeling and simulation package can
understand. What happens when you add a person to a team?\" Tompkins
thought it over. \"The initial impact is always negative,\" he began.
\"The guy does nothing usefixl on his first day, and he uses up other
people\'s time to learn. So7aggregate team production rate takes a
hit.\" Dr. Jamid was modeling on the laptop as he listened. \"Then,
little by little, he becomes a full member of the team.\" Tompkins
picked up the yellow pad and pen and sketched his concept quickly.
\"Something like this.\"

Dr. Jamid peered at the graph and integrated its concept into his
emerging model with a few dozen keystrokes and mouse clicks. Mr.
Tompkins plowed on: \"Only there\'s not as much advantage in adding him
if he\'s the seventh person, for example, as there would be if he were
the sixth. So, I guess, there\'s a kind of penalty that is a hnction of
team size. The more people on the team, the more interactions, and
therefore the more time lost.\" \"Commit yourself. Make me a graph of
that, too.\" \"Well, let\'s see. If we look at the total production rate
of the team as a function of team size,\" he sketched as he spoke,
\"then the forty-five degree line would represent the ideal. Staying on
that line would mean that each added person contributed as much as the
one before. Doubling the size of the team would double its capacity, no
interaction penalty. The truth is a little less than the ideal.
Something like this.\"

\"The difference between the Actual and the Unattainable Ideal is your
interaction penalty.\" Dr. Jamid peered over at the drawing. \"I see. I
can replicate the shape of your graph, more or less, in the model.\" He
put a finger on the Actual curve, about midway across the dia-

gram. \"Tell me, how big does the team have to be before the
interaction penalty is up to a third?\" \"Huh?\" \"I\'ve picked a point
on your curve where the interaction penalty is about half the Actual
value. So, that means about one third of Unattainable Ideal capacity is
wasted at that point .\" \"I follow you that far.\" \"How big is the
team at that point?\" \"I don\'t know.\" \"Of course you don\'t know.
We\'re not trying, just now, to find out what you know. We\'re trying to
find out what you feel. Ask your gut. How big does the team have to be
before a third of capacity is used in interaction penalty?\" \"The best
answer I can give you is very loosey-goosey.\" \"Commit yourself. How
big?\" \"Well, I\'d say about four.\" \"So, the net capacity of four
people working together is about a third less than four times the
capacity of a single person who got to do the whole job alone?\" Mr.
Tompkins shrugged. \"Of course, I\'m not sure, but that answer seems
about right to me.\" \"Good.\" Dr. Jamid entered a bit more into his
laptop. When he was done, he displayed the result and turned the screen
for Mr. Tompkins to see. \"Here is our model of your hunch about team
size.

New T e a m Members

T o t d Production Rate

\"The entire project is portrayed as an effort to move work from one
reservoir to another. We start out with the Remaining Work reservoir
full and the Work Completed reservoir empty. The units of work have to
be expressed in some kind of synthetic metric of job size. . . .\"
\"Lines of code? Something like that?\" \"Well, that would do if we
failed to come up with something better. The capacity to get work done
is modeled by one valve, called Total Production Rate. The higher its
setting, the faster the work moves out of Remaining Work and into Work
Completed. Obviously, the values of Total Production Rate have to be
expressed in the same size units used in the reservoirs.\" \"I see,\"
Mr-Tompkinssaid. He wasn\'t at all sure that he did.

\"Finally, the thin arrows are dependencies. They tell us, for example,
that Total Production Rate is dependent on four things: the size of the
Integrated Team, the number of New Team Members still only partially
integrated, the Interaction Penalty, and the Integration Cost.\"
\"Integration Cost would be, I\'m guessing here, the proportion of lost
effort due to bringing the new members up to speed?\" \"Yes. Now I write
an equation or build a graphical definition for each valve and for each
of these circular meters. So, for example, here is the way I defined the
Interaction Penalty meter.\"

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

\... \... \... \... \... \... \... \... \... \...

Integrated-Team

\"As you can see, it starts off at zero and builds to approximately a
third by the time you have four people on the team. I just guessed what
you\'d want the rest of the curve to look like.\" Mr.Tompkins stared at
the graph. Did that in fact represent his best hunch about how much
penalty there was as team size increased?

Dr. Jamid seemed to be reading his mind. \"As we play with this model,
you may find you need to adjust either this curve or any of the others.
Or you may need to change the model itself.\" \"To make it conform to
what my hunch base really says.\" \"Exactly.\" \"Well, right now my
hunch base is telling me a change is needed. It\'s not happy with the
static value of Interaction Penalty. Maybe the penalty ought to be a
dynamic finction of time. Afier all, people do learn to work together.\"
Dr. Jamid nodded agreeably. \"Talk to me about that.\" Mr.Tompkins
reflected for a moment. \"Well, teams in my opinion have a potential of
achieving almost a negative interaction penalty over time. Something
happens and the team dynamic becomes so strong that it overcomes the
interaction penalty. The whole can become greater than the sum of the
parts. The team comes together and . . . I don\'t know, it unifies.\"
After a moment, Abdul turned the screen to him again. \"Like this?\"

Total Production R a t e

\"Well, yes, something like that. There is definitely an effect of
jell, as you call it. Now we have to go back and redefine Integration
Cost.\" \"Of course.\" Mr.Tompkins studied the screen for a long moment.
\"You know, I think that is my model. It looks pretty much like what\'s
going on inside me when I try to figure out how well the team will
pe&orm. Of course, it may be quite wrong, not at all the way real teams
perform, . . .\" \"Of course. But now at least you have a way to test it
out. You simulate to see what your combined hunches predict, and then
you let the real project run for a while to collect tuning information
to perfect the model.\" \"I see.\" \"Little by little, you integrate
this tuning information until .. I\' \". . . the hunch on the screen is
better than the hunch in the gut.\" \"Precisely.\" In the cab out to the
airport, Mr. Tompkins asked,\"What\'s the name of the modeling and
simulation package you use? I\'m going to want to order a copy as soon
as I get back to my office.\" \"The one I use is called ithink,\" Dr.
Jarnid told him,\* \"but you don\'t have to order a copy,\'Webster.
I\'ve already bought one for you.\" He reached into his briefcase and
pulled out a boxed software package, still sealed in its
shrink-wrapping. \"Oh,Abdul. You didn\'t have to do that. I could have .
. .\"

\* ithink@ is a registered trademark of High Performance Systems, Inc.,
Hanover, N.H.

114

Dr. Jamid held up his hand. \"Please, Webster. This was meant to
complement all that we have been talking about, to make it a complete
and accessible delivery of my scheme. Besides, it didn\'t cost so very
much. You bought us a lovely lunch in Rome this afternoon. And I bought
you this sofiware product &-oma mail-order house in California. I assure
you it cost me less than our lunch cost you.\" He passed over the box.
Then he reached into his case again and pulled out a diskette. \"And
here is the set of models we developed together yesterday and today. It
will be a starting point . . .\" Mr. Tompkins finished for him, \". . .
a starting point for a modeling effort that won\'t stop till we\'ve got
all our hunches captured. I promise you that, Abdul. I promise you
that.\" From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

Modelina and 5imulation of the Develo\~mentProcess o

Model your hunches a b o u t t h e processes t h a t get work done.

o

Use the models in peer interaction t o communicate and refine thinking
about how the process works.

o

Use the models t o simulate results.

o

Tune t h e models a g a i n s t a c t u a l results.

a

crisp Morovian spring morning. Mr. Tompkins was on his way before seven,
taking his usual constitutional walk on the way to work. When the
morning was so lovely as this one, he liked to dawdle on the way,
breathing in the freshness of a new day. From the Residence invarsjop to
his office building on the Aidrivoli Campus was a one mile walk, all of
it on a breathtakingly pretty pathway cut through the vineyards and
along the side of a little brook. Why is it, he wondered (as he did
almost every day), that the developed world has so much material
advantage, but can\'t seem to provide a pleasant walking path &om A to
B? No matter what your A and B were in Morovia, there was a fine walking
path between them. As he was early, he continued on along the brook well
past the turnoff for the office campus. Half a mile farther on was a
little pond, and beside it a wooden bench where he liked to sit on nice
mornings and reflect. He stepped quietly for the last hundred yards of
his approach to the pond; there were sometimes deer there, or the
occasional baby rabbit with its mother, and he didn\'t want to disturb
them.

He settled down onto the bench and sighed deeply, pervaded by a sense
of well-being. He\'d been in Morovia now for a little more than three
months and he could not remember a happier time in his life. Being fired
had turned out to be the best thing that could have happened to him.
Well, that wasn\'t quite right. Lots of people got fired and didn\'t
land on their feet as well as he had. It wasn\'t being fired that had
been his lucky break, but being kidnapped by Lahksa Hoolihan. He looked
up at the sound of a splash at the edge of the pond. There was a rapid
flapping after the splash and, just a moment later, a cheerful call from
up in the tree just at the water\'s edge. Moving very slowly, he reached
down into his bag for a bird book and a pair of binoculars he carried
for just this purpose. He focused the binoculars on a chunky little bird
with a huge head of green feathers. Without too much trouble, he found
the same bird pictured in his book. He turned to the note pages at the
back and wrote down \"April 4: Belted Kingfisher.\" Then, he put the
book and pen and binoculars on the bench beside him until something else
should show up. That he was feeling so content just now did not imply
that there weren\'t a few problems. Of course there were problems. You
didn\'t run a group of talented developers without problems here and
there. Morovia was no different in this respect than any other place he
had ever worked. People who are good tend to know it and to make sure
you know they know it. Sometimes, they could be a pain in the butt, and
he certainly had his share of prima donnas. But he\'d learned long ago
to appreciate, or at least try to appreciate, even the most obnoxious of
them. And, of course, there were schedule problems. If he looked at his
contract end date (a year fiom next November)

as a deadline, then most of the projects under him would be challenged
to make it. He was optimistic that some of the smaller ones might be
complete by that time; however, a project like PShop would be lucky to
come in even a year later. So, what he was faced with, in that project
at least, was to figure out some way to gain a hll year. Oh, well,
don\'t worry about that on such a pretty morning. He knew he\'d be
sitting down later in the day with ex-General Markov and Belinda Binda
for a brainstorming session on that very problem. For now, he could
relax and feel good about all the things that were going right: lots of
sharp people on his staff who were happy to be doing good work;
excellent managers at two levels underneath him; truly superior
facilities; and most of all, two of the best peers he had ever had to
work with. In Belinda and Gabriel, he knew he had assembled the ultimate
management \"dream team.\" He had come to rely on them both for s a y
counsel and continued insight. In retrospect, this was the first time in
his professional life that he had been turned loose to do the best work
he could without there being some idiot somewhere above him in the chain
of command to ruin everything by trimming reasonable schedules or
overriding his best decisions. NNL seemed like a pretty sensible fellow
once Tompkins had taken a firm stand and laid down the law to him. Since
their first meeting in Korsach, Morovia\'s tyrant had been almost putty
in his hands. He seemed comfortable to let Tompkins run his shop the way
it ought to be run. What could be better than that? A supportive manager
above and competent people and challenging work below. Mr. Tompkins
repacked his bag and headed off toward the office. He walked with a
bounce in his stride. By the time he arrived, he had gone beyond being
merely content and was feeling positively ebullient.

Waldo met him at the door to his office and pulled him aside. He
whispered, \"Boss, there\'s something you need to know.\" \"What\'s
that?\'\' \"NNL has gone back to the States for a while, to look out for
his other interests. Evidently he\'s going to be gone for quite a
while.\" \"And . . . ?\" \"And, in his absence, he\'s placed a certain
Mr. Belok in charge.\" \"Oh oh.\" \"Oh oh, indeed.\" Waldo gestured back
toward the office door. \"Mr. Belok is waiting for you in your
office.\'\' Tompkins nodded and stepped through the door. There, seated
behind his own desk was a short, very smug-looking man. Their eyes met
briefly. ThenTompkins looked up at the wall behind his desk where Waldo
kept the countdown display of days remaining till Delivery Day. Just the
afternoon before, it had shown 607 days left, so now it should show 606.
But it didn\'t. What it showed instead was

\"Oh, shit!\" Mr. Tompkins said. The card that the little man offered
Mr-Tompkins read \"Allair Belok, Minister of Internal Affairs and Deputy
Tyrant.\" \"I think that should make things clear,\" the man said. \"It
doesn\'t make anything clear at all. I work for NNL, directly.\" \"Not
all that directly, as it turns out.\" Minister Belok looked particularly
pleased with himself at this. He passed one

hand through a greasy head of hair, then wiped it absently on his
jacket. \"Not so directly as you might have thought.\" \"I\'ll wait for
NNL himself to confirm that.\" The little man glanced down elaborately
at his fingernails. Seeing something black under one, he lifted it
delicately to his mouth and cleaned it against a lower tooth. He studied
the nail again at arm\'s length. Without eye contact: \"Oh, I wouldn\'t
wait if I were you. NNZ, is planning on being away for the foreseeable
fixture.\" \"Where is he?\" \"Away. Mr. Tompkins-Webster . . .\" Belok
spread his hands out, palms up, the gesture of appeal to reason, \"I see
no reason why we shouldn\'t get along. We should. I expect we\'re going
to get along swimmingly. You\'ll find that I am a most reasonable man.\"
He smiled nastily. \"Right.\" \"Most reasonable, really. And I go back
quite a long way with Himself.\" \"Big deal.\" \"And I\'m here and he
isn\'t. Do you get my drift?\" Mr.Tompkins shook his head. \"I\'m not
sure I want to get your drift. But go ahead. Drift on.\" \'\"Drift
on,\"\' the Minister repeated the words distastemy. He looked
heavenward, his saintly patience tried. Then, looking back at Tompkins
with a sneer: \"I am, quite simply, the only indispensable person in
this Morovian venture. In the past, I have been responsible for
financial matters, all financial matters in NNL\'s various interests.
The dear boy is-how shall I put this?-not too swift about the financial
side of things.\" \"He is a billionaire,\"Tompkins said pointedly. \"My
point exactly. He is not swift about finance, and yet he has become one
of the richest men in the world. Now, how do you suppose that
happened?\"

\"You, no doubt.\" Belok smiled again. \"Modesty forbids that I take
all the credit. I mean, Himself does have a certain flair for things
technical. However, suffice it to say that without my little
contribution he would probably be running a two-bit operation today.\" I
see.\" \"He has his talents and I have mine. It\'s as simple as that.\"
\"Uh huh.\" \"One of the things he is not too talented at is
impartinghow shall I say this?-a sense of urgency to those who work
under him.\" \"You, on the other hand, are rather good at applying the
old pressure. Am I getting this right?\" \"Quite right. It is a kind of
genius of mine. I hope I\'m not being too immodest.\" \"Heavens, no.
Just realistic, I suspect.\" \"You see? We are getting along. This is
going to be even easier than I thought.\" \"I doubt it. But go ahead.\"
\"Well, as I said, my particular focus is the financial. Now we\'ll just
ignore the financial aspects of you and your rather over-rewarded s t
,and the outrageous costs of all those computers and networks and hubs
and satellite dishes and high-speed modems and all that other rather
irresponsible spending. . . .\" \"We\'re going to ignore all that. Good.
I think that\'s wise.\" A tight little smile. \"Fine. You see how
reasonable I am. We\'ll ignore all that. What we\'re not going to ignore
however is the cost of lateness.\" \"Ah.\" \"Lateness costs money. That
shouldn\'t surprise you. The six products you have been charged with
producing have all got projected revenue streams. The PShop product,
just to take (6

one example, is eventually going to produce something on the order o f
. . .\" he looked down at a notebook lying open on the desk in front of
him, \".. . a revenue stream of some thirty-eight d o n dollars a year.
These are, of course, U.S. dollars.\" Tompkins knew where this was
going. He stared at the man glumly. \"The Quicken replacement product
will generate some twenty-three million dollars; eleven million for
Paint-It, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. All together, the six
products should generate about one hundred sixty-four million dollars
per year. Discounting that for materials and sales and promotion, the
net income would be just a little over ninety million dollars. You see
where I\'m going?\" \"Of course.\" He\'d been there many times before.
\"Ninety million a year works out to . . .\" he punched some numbers
into a calculator, \"\$246,575.34 a day. Just to use round numbers,
that\'s a quarter of a million dollars a day of projt.\" He leaned
heavily on the last two words. Again, the slimy smile. \"Yawn.\" The
smile faded away. \"Every day you dick around, Tompkins, costs me a
quarter of a million dollars. Could I be more clear?\" \"Oh, no. You
couldn\'t be more clear. I understood you exactly, even before you
started.\" \"Splendid. We are beginning to understand each other. Now
I\'ve decided to give you just the littlest nudge on these projects,
something to help galvanize you and your people. What I\'ve decided is
to make a tiny change in the deadline.. . .\" \"There is no deadline.\"
\"Oh, I quite understand. NNL himself told me that. Said you were quite
persuasive on the subject. No deadhe. But the fact is that you did set a
deadline yourself for the November

after next. It wasn\'t made public and you certainly didn\'t allow
anyone else to impose it on you, but you did set that as a tentative
deadline. I know that &-omthe amusing little display you keep up here on
the wall.\" Tompkins conceded a point. \"We\'ve barely finished the
detailed estimates, but it is true that I was hopefkl of getting most of
the products done by that November.\" \"There you are. So, there really
was a deadline. And now there is a new one: the first of June of next
year.\" Tompkins saw red. \"That\'s absurd!\" he sputtered. \"Not
absurd. It is ambitious, perhaps. Maybe even aggressive. But not
absurd.\" \"It is utterly absurd. We have sized these products
precisely. We have very reasonable measures of past productivity. And
even allowing for a substantial improvement over the past, we can barely
hope to finish even the smallest projects by the November after next. A
project like PShop goes way beyond that November. June is simply out of
the question.\" Again the gesture of reason. \"Not at all, not at all.
I\'m sure you can do it. In fact, I\'m going to be giving you an
important bit of help, just to make sure you succeed.\" \"I hardly dare
ask what.\" Belok stood up and walked over to the org chart on the white
board. He drew a circle around the three PShop projects. \"What an
amusing little experiment we find here. Three projects vying to produce
the same product. And here, . . .\" he draw another circle around the
three Quirk projects, \"three projects to produce one product. And here,
. . .\" He continued down the board circling the sets of competing
projects. \"It\'s what you\'re calling the \'Project Management
Laboratory,\' I believe. Charming. Perfectly charming . . . BUT NOT WHEN
IT\'S COSTING ME A QUARTER OF A MILLION DOLLARS A DAY!!!\"

Belok walked back to the desk and sat down. He made a visible effort to
compose himself. \"Excuse me. I think I may have raised my voice. Calm
yourself, Allair, calm, calm. There, that\'s better. All calm again. You
see, it\'s just that the thought of lost profit can be so very
disturbing, particularly to someone of my very refined sensibilities.\"
Mr. Tompkins groaned inwardly. \"So, there we have it. I think we\'ve
come to an agreement, haven\'t we? You will combine the three Quirk
teams into one Quirk super-team. With those extra people, you will
achieve, of course, an earlier delivery. Note that I am allowing you to
triple the team, but all I ask is that you reduce the project by a mere
six months, not even a twenty-five percent reduction in calendar time.
Now I call that reasonable: Triple the team to reduce delivery time by
six months. That\'s what I mean when I say I am a most reasonable man.
Triple the size of the Quickerstill team, triple the Paint-It team,
triple the PShop team. . . .\" He was at the board again, merging all
the teams into super-teams. Mr. Tompkins took a deep breath. It probably
wasn\'t worth it, but he had to make an effort. \"Minister Belok . . .\"
\"Allair, please call me Allair.\" \"Um, yes.\" He swallowed h s pride.
\"Allair. Look, we\'ve been giving a lot of thought to some of these
very questions over the past few weeks, my assistants and I. We knew we
were up against it with the PShop project, for example, so we were
looking for ways to cut the delivery time. As luck would have it, we
have just stumbled on a new technology that allows us to simulate the
effect of various management decisions, to see how they will work out.
One of the things the simulation tells us is that projects can\'t always
save time by adding staff. The problem is that there is an absorption
rate effect that says teams can only build up so fast. If you try to

push them faster than that, you do more harm than good. Further, there
is an interaction penalty that causes the nth person added to a team to
be worth less than the ones before.\" Mr.Tompkins opened a file drawer
and pulled out some of the simulations they\'d been running over the
past few days, using Dr. Jamid\'s model. \"Now, here, if I can just find
the right sheet . . . yes, here. Look at this.\" He spread the results
of one run on the desk in front of Belok. \"Look at this. We\'re
currentIy projecting 524 workdays for our PShop-A project with twelve
people on board. Now, if we were to bump up staff to twenty-four people,
our simulation shows that it would take them longer to do the same work.
Instead of 524 workdays, they will require almost six hundred!\" Belok
suppressed a yawn. \"Right. So what?\" \"So what?!? So instead of
finishing earlier, we\'ll finish later, that\'s what.\" \"Look,
Tompkins. I don\'t care about any of this. Combine the teams and publish
the new delivery date. Do as you\'re told. Make sure that everybody
knows that every day the work is late beyond June first will cost us a
quarter of a million dollars of lost profit.\" \"But that won\'t help.
It\'s going to hurt. You\'re going to lose more profit by oversding
these teams. You\'re just going to make us later. We could deliver the
product to you in 524 workdays, but because of this decision it will
take us six hundred.\" \"The deadline is June first. That\'s the last
word. I will not hear talk of delivering any later than that.\" \"Even
though this will result in being later still than we would have been?\"
Belok smiled without humor. \"Tompkins, let me make this even clearer
for you. I want the deadline changed, I want the pressure put on, and I
want the teams combined. If that makes the delivery later than it might
have been otherwise, so be it.\"

\"All those quarter-millions of dollars lost.\" A shrug. \"So we lose
some money. When your team eventually delivers PShop, say in six hundred
days as you predict, we\'ll begin coining money. And when it comes time
to hand out the credit for that, NNL will be looking square at the fact
that, but for my intervention to triple the people on the PShop team,
the project would probably have dribbled on for as much as eighteen
hundred days.\" A long silence as Mr. Tompkins digested that. Finally he
said,\"You\'ve been very clear. Let me be clear as well. Stuff it in
your ear.\" Belok chuckled. \"A man of principle. I like that. Our
Mr-Tompkinsis willing to put his job on the line.\" \"I am. Every day,
if need be. If you\'re not willing to put your job on the line, your job
is not worth having.\" The Minister put his pen down on the blotter and
spun it idly, looking smug. \"He\'s willing to put his job on the line
.. . but is he willing to put his l\$e on the line?\" Tompkins stared at
him, stunned. \"What the hell does that mean?\" \"A little joke.\" \"Are
you suggesting . . . ?\" \"Just some light humor.\" \"I don\'t think it
was very funny. If you\'re thinking of any such thing, I want you to
know that I have some resources in that area myself.\" \"Ah, the lovely
Miss Hoolihan. Yes, she would be a formidable ally, if it came to that.
She would. Unfortunately, she has accompanied our Noble Leader on his
swing through the States. That was my rather inspired idea. I don\'t
expect to see her back here for the next few months. . . .\"

The management \"dream team\" of Tompkins, Binda, and Markov sat around
the glass coffee table in Mr.T.\'s office. The afternoon light was
failing but no one moved toward the switch. They had been there a long
time. Ex-General Markov broke the silence. \"He is a dangerous man, this
Belok. There is no question of that. And, this being Morovia, there are
probably plenty of people who would carry out his dirty work for him. We
have a long tradition of dirty work. I had hoped that would all come to
an end.\" He had said all of that several times already. \"What I feel
stupidest about,\" Mr. Tompkins said, \"is my own willingness to believe
that here at last I had found myself a job with no politics. I guess
there is no such thing as a job without politics.\" \"There is no such
thing as a job with no politics,\" the exGeneral agreed. \"Politics is
the bane of every manager\'s life.\" Belinda objected. \"Come on,
Gabriel, this isn\'t politics, this is criminal mischief.\" \"But there
is always politics,\" the ex-General told her. \"There is politics in
every job. And it\'s often just another form of criminal mischief.\" \"I
don\'t agree with that at all,\" Belinda said. \"Politics is a noble
science. It\'s one of the five noble sciences that Aristotle named, the
five branches of philosophy. There was Metaphysics, Logic, Ethics,
Aesthetics, and Politics. The noble science of Politics is what we\'ve
been practicing, the three of us, over the past three months. We\'ve
been building a community that could act together ethically and
harmoniously to achieve a common purpose. That\'s what politics is all
about. Don\'t dignifjr Belok and all he stands for with a good
Aristotelian word like that.\"

\"But you know what he means, Belinda,\" Mr. Tompkins offered. \"He
means politics in the sleazy sense, the way we ofien use the word to
mean, I guess, a kind of pathological politics.\" Belinda nodded. \"Yes,
I understood that, Webster. But let\'s use our words precisely. The
three of us are trying to practice Politics in the Aristotelian sense.
Belok is just trying to be an amateur greaseball.\" Ex-General Markov
nodded. \"Still, an amateur greaseball can cause a lot of damage.\"
\"So, what do I do?\" Mr.Tompkins asked them. They both looked to
Belinda for an answer, an answer that took its time coming. \"You don\'t
accomplish anything by standing in front of a train,\" she told him
gently. \"No,\" Mr. Tompkins agreed. \"No,\" the ex-General agreed.
After another long silence, ex-General Markov cleared his throat. \"Why
are we here?\"he asked. \"Hmm?\" \"What is it that we\'re trylng to
accomplish? Forget about this greaseball for a moment. What are we
really trying to do?\" \"Well, good work for one thing,\" Mr.T. said.
\"We\'re here to do good work, and to enable other people to do good
work.\" \"There\'s that,\" Belinda agreed, \"but we\'re also here to
learn something. What has made this so wonderful, at least up until this
morning, was the Project Management Laboratory experiment. We were
hell-bent toward learning some truly fundamental things about the
dynamics of projects, about how management decisions really affect a
project. That was part of why I was here, and I think the same for
you,Webster.\" \"Right. All the things we\'ve been simulating this week
and last were effects that our experiments would have validated. We
could have come away with an extraordinary result,

a completely tuned model of project dynamics, one that could guide us
and the rest of the world &-omthat point on.\" The ex-General leaned
forward to reach out to each of them, placing one of his big hands on
Webster\'s shoulder and one on Belinda\'s. \"Well, let\'s not give any
of that up. That\'s what we\'re here for. To do good work and to learn.
Let\'s stick to our guns.\" \"But how do we do that without putting
Webster in danger?\"Belinda objected. \"We don\'t put Webster in danger
because we have Webster do exactly as he has been told.\" \"You mean, I
do combine the eighteen teams into six super-teams, all of them horribly
overstaffed?\" \"Yes, because you have to. And, you publish the June
first date. And you make an announcement that the price of lateness is a
million dollars a moment. You do all that. Just hold your nose and do
it.\" \"But Gabriel, how do we still manage to do good work?\" \"And how
do we ever learn anything &-omsix stupidly overstaffed and overpressured
projects?\'\' Belinda added. \"We\'ve been looking at it as a false
dichotomy\" the exGeneral told them. \"We\'ve been thinking a l l day
that either we do the projects the way we always planned to do them and
preserve our Project Management Laboratory, or we give in to the
greaseball. That has been our error. It doesn\'t have to be a matter of
OR. It could also be a matter of AND.\" \"Explain that.\" \"Yes, please
do.\" \"We combine the projects. We combine three QuickerStill teams
into one. That gives us one overstaffed team and two free managers. . .
.\" He left a long silence. \"Ah,\" Webster said. \"I see what you mean.
We have a pool of available workers to draw on, so we just set up two

new teams under those two fi-ee managers. We do the same thing for all
the other products. And, again, we\'ve got three teams doing each
project.\" \"Exactly.\" \"Only the new teams are a few months behind, .
. . so what\'s a few months?\" Belinda was looking more cheedd. \"We\'ve
learned a lot, we have our simulations to guide us, and we can make some
of the early project deliverables that were generated by the old B- and
C-Teams available to the new teams that take their places. I think it
would work, Gabriel. What do you think,Webster?\" Mr.Tompkins was
thoughtll for a moment. \"Of course it can be made to work. We have to
be a little carefkl here, though. We\'ll have to keep the new B- and
C-Teams a secret; otherwise, they\'ll be a threat to Belok.\" The
ex-General smiled. \"Leave that to me, my friends. I am an expert in
concealing things. This was an important skill in the old Morovia.\"
\"And in the new one,\" Webster added. \"As we all now know.\" \"So, we
move all Webster\'s B- and C-Team managers over to Gabriel\'s building,
restaff their projects, and keep them there under wraps.\" \"Right. Only
one problem that I see, though.\" \"What\'s that Webster?\" \"One of the
B- or C-Teams is likely to finish long before its corresponding A-Team
does. We know that fi-om the simulations. When that happens, Belok is
shown up for exactly the meddler he is; his overstaffed and
overpressured projects are going to be trounced by our leaner teams. He
is not going to take that lying down.\" \"So, we don\'t tell him,\"
Belinda suggested. \"We\'ll publish the product and tell the world that
it was Minister Belok\'s refor-

mulated super-team that got the work done so quickly. Without his
intervention, it would have taken three times as long.\" \"But that\'s
terrible,\" Mr. Tompkins wailed. \"All the credit will go to the wrong
people.\" \"But we\'ll all know, and our people will all know, so who
cares, as long as Belok doesn\'t know.\" \"She\'s right, Webster,\"
ex-General Markov told him. \"Remember why we are here: to do good work
and to learn. That we don\'t also thwart the greaseball is a small
matter. He will get what\'s coming to him one day.\" \"Hrnrn.\" Mr.T.
was beginning to feel better, too. He wasn\'t sure it would work, but at
least they\'d be doing something more than just caving in. \"Of course
you\'re right. We\'ll do it,\'\' he said at last. \"And so the Project
Management Laboratory is saved, for the moment at least. I have a hunch
we\'re going to be learning something we really hadn\'t counted on:
We\'re going to come away with a very precise understanding of how
overstaffing hurts projects, how much, and in what ways. Well, folks,
let\'s get the lights on here. We\'ve got work to do.\" Many hours
later, Mr. Tompkins stumbled back to the Residence and up to his suite.
He got into his pajamas. He would have liked to turn in directly-it was
already after 2 A.M.-but instead, he sat down at the little writing desk
beside his bed and took up his pen. From Mr.Tompkins\'Journal:

Pathological Politics o

You have t o be willing t o p u t your job on t h e line any day

\...

o

. . . but t h a t doesn\'t

o

Pathological politics can crop UP anywhere, even in the healthiest
organization.

o

The defining characteristic of pathological politics is t h a t goals of
personal power and influence come t o override the natural goals of an
organization.

o

This can happen even when the pathological goal is directly opposed t o
the organizational goal.

o

Among t h e bad side e f f e c t s o f pathology: I t becomes unsafe t o
have a leanly staffed project.

guarantee t h a t pathological politics won\'t affect you.

He looked back over what he had written. The last item was the most
depressing of all. The more they worked with the Jamid simulations, the
more they were coming to realize that there were substantial
productivity advantages to running very small teams. Sometimes, a small
team could do wonders in a short time, while large teams could barely
get going in the same period. But small teams were impossible in a
sufficiently political climate. You wouldn\'t dare try to pull off a
miracle with only four or five people on board. If you tried and failed,
there would always be someone willing to suggest that you could have
succeeded if only you\'d added another dozen or two dozen people. In
such an environment, managers have to take the only safe option and
overstaff their projects, even though they know in their hearts that
it\'s exactly the wrong thing to do.

\$ey had spent most of each day since Minister Belokys bombshell
interviewing new teams. This work had gone somewhat faster than expected
because they\'d had the assistance of the six product managers and the
twelve newly redundant B- and C-Team managers. They\'d divided
themselves up into groups of three and blitzed through ex-General
Markov\'s staff, looking for the best people. Sadly, the most talented
people were the ones they\'d chosen before, during the earlier set of
interviews in January and February. After all, they had set out then to
take the cream of the crop, and they undoubtedly had. Now all those good
developers had been combined into the six A-Teams:

All the A-Teams were, in

all of their judgment, too heavily

staffed for their own good. They were hell-bent for failure. That
didn\'t mean Mr. T. could ignore them, however. He still had to manage
their managers. That alone used up a big piece of his time. The official
org chart showed him sitting directly on top of the six A-Team managers.
This was something of a fiction, generated to keep Minister Belok off
their backs. The real organization was similar to what had existed
before the shake-up. It had six product managers plus ex-General Markov
reporting directly to Tompkins. The six product managers each ran three
project teams, as before: the reformulated A-Teams and the newly formed
Band C-Teams. By the time they were finished stafting, they had eighteen
totally independent projects:

Tompkins and the A-Teams were housed in the prestigious and very visible
Aidrivoli-1 building. The six product managers and the B- and C-Teams
were all hidden away in space that the ex-General had found for them in
Aidrivoli-7. Just three week after Lahska\'s sudden disappearance, Mr.
Tompkins found a breezy postcard &om her in his morning

mail. The picture side showed students clustered around street
musicians in what was almost certainly Harvard Square. On the back she
had written in her fine script,

My akar Webster, I have cone across a charming small company here in
Massachusetts. fiey measure things, all finds of things, but software in
particular. B e y h u e a special way to aktermine the size of a
software product entirelyfrom the outs&. ?lie result is epressed in
units they cdl \"finction points. \" Of course, I thought immediately of
you. I h u e contracted with their consultant, a Mr. I .Johns Capmous,
to pay you a visit. m t h e but, -h.h&a A few days later, Mr. Tompkins
received a fax from a Cambridge company instructing him to meet T.Johns
Caporous at the Varsjop airport the next morning. When the flight
touched down, the first person to step off the plane was a
genial-looking man with sparkling eyes who seemed to be running at an
internal clock speed at least twice that of a normal human. He also
spoke about twice as fast as anyone Tompkins had ever met before. His
words came like bullets out of a machine gun. \"How many programmers do
you suppose there are in Morovia?\"he asked Mr.Tompkins, as soon as they
were in the car. \"Well, I couldn\'t say exactly, but . . .\" \"Two
thousand eight hundred sixty-one, as of first of the year. How many
computers would you guess?\" \"Um . . .\"

\"Just over three thousand workstations, thirty-six percent Macs,
fifiy-five percent Windows, eight percent Unix boxes, and the rest
mixed. Twelve Internet servers. One hundred sixty hand-held organizers,
a few old-fashioned mainframes, mostly used by the military.\" \"Oh.\"
He smiled easily at Tompkins. \"I\'ve never been to Morovia. It\'s nice
here, isn\'t it?\" \"It is.\" \"Average ambient daytime temperature, 78
degrees Fahrenheit; that would be, let\'s see, 25.6 degrees centigrade;
average annual rainfall, 66.8 inches a year, . . . say, I\'ll bet they
could make some fine wine here.\" \"Delicious, actually.\" \"And they
certainly make a lot of it, almost fifty-eight million liters a year.
That\'s as much wine as is imported by the New England states plus New
York and, say, Pennsylvania combined. Not that the northeastern states
drink so much wine . . . only about 4.2 liters per person per year. All
of which is not imported of course. Only thirty-eight percent.\" Mr.
Tompkins nodded dazedly. Four and a half hours later,T.Johns Caporous
was gone again, delivered back to the airport by Waldo. He had flown in
on his way from Ankara and had to be in Helsinki that very evening.
Then, the next day he would be off to Dublin, and fi-om there to South
America for a five-country lecture tour. Mr. Tompkins\' office looked
like a tornado had come through. There were manuals and reports open on
every surface. There were pads of paper littered with calculations, and
the white board was full. Mr. Tompkins was trying to collect together
and annotate what seemed like a mile of calculator

tapes from the fbrious morning of work. In one corner, exGeneral Markov
was sprawled on a folding chair, still looking stunned. Tompkins as well
was still slightly in shock. It was as concentrated a morning as he had
spent in years. He certainly didn\'t want to go through another one like
that, not without a good rest in between. But as hectic as it had been,
it had produced one very interesting result: a compact table of numbers
written in T. Johns Caporous\'s distinctive scrawl. The matrix occupied
only a single flip-chart sheet, now displayed on the easel by the desk.
It showed the sizes of the six software products:

PRODUCT

SIZE

NOTATE

3,000 Function Points

PAINT-il QUIRK -

QUICKERSTILL

\<\<

1

3,200 Function Points 1,500 Function Points

Hi, guys.\" It was Belinda Binda. She had missed the morning meeting.
\"Hey, looks like you\'ve had a fun day. What hit this place?\" \"A
certain T.Johns Caporous,\" Mr-Tompkins told her. \"Ooooh. I\'ve heard
of him. I\'ve heard he is a kind of unstoppable force.\" Mr.Tompkins and
the ex-General nodded in agreement. Belinda turned to stare at the flip
chart. \"What\'s a function point? Wait a minute, don\'t answer that. I
think I don\'t even have to know.\" After a moment she turned back to

them. Her eyes were alight. \"Why, this is beautiful. Gabriel, Webster,
do you realize what we\'ve got here?\" The ex-General was shaking his
head. \"It feels like it\'s going to be usehl. I do suspect it\'s good
for something. But as to exactly what, . . .\" Belinda was practically
dancing with excitement. \"This is beautifid, this is beautihl! Think
how it ties in with the simulation models we\'ve been drawing. We\'ve
been drawing flow models,\" she walked over to one of the models pinned
up on the wall, \"reservoirs emptying into pipes, flowing through
valves. But what exactly is it that is flowing? What is it that moves
through our models? What is it that\'s in the reservoirs?\" \"I don\'t
know,\" Tompkins told her. \"Done-ness?\" \"Or goodness,\" the
ex-General suggested. \"Some kind of an abstract quantification of
work.\" \"No, you sillies. It\'s hnction points that flow through the
models. Look!\" She flipped the flip chart to get to a blank sheet and
took up a pen. \"Look at it this way.\" She was sketching quickly. \"We
can look at each project in exactly the same way. At the coarsest level,
the project is just a valve.\" She tapped her pen on the valve in the
middle of her diagram. \"On the left side, we have a reservoir of
product to be developed. O n the right side is a reservoir of product
completed. We start off with the right side completely empty, since we
haven\'t done anything yet. The left side starts off filled with
function points. How many? Well, . . .\" She flipped back to the Capomus
data. \"Here we have it: three thousand hnction points for the Notes
project, for example.\" She wrote the number in at the level of the
left-side reservoir.

\"Now the guts of our model is the next-level decomposition of that
valve called The Project. We model it in terms of the teams and the
partitionings and the effects of pressure and deadline and staff level
and critical-path delays and . . . whatever. All of those we simulate
using lower-level pipelines and valves and reservoirs. Now, when we run
the project, the leftside reservoir empties through the complex valve or
network of such valves that is The Project into the right-side
reservoir. When all the function points have gotten through, the project
is done!\" For the rest of the afternoon, they closeted themselves in
Mr. T.\'s office, reconstructing the sizing algorithms that Caporous had
shown them. They were also trying to make sense of the mountain of
information that he had thrown at them during the morning. While he was
calculating,T.Johns Caporous had the habit of spitting out rapid-fire
facts like \"Average American software cost is \$1,050 per function
point as of 1994,\" or Software maintenance on average requires one
maintainer per five hundred function points of product,\" or
\"Undebugged code has a defect potential of 5.6 per fhnction point.\"
Mr. Tompkins had struggled to keep up, writing fact after fact on index
cards, almost, but not quite as fast as Caporous spewed 66

them out. Now they were sorting through the cards, looking for gems.
\"What we don\'t know,\" the ex-General said, with some
discouragement,\"is what the productivity of our organization is. Look
at the variation in the figures Caporous gave us: fi-om two hnction
points per month all the way up to ninety. But where are we?\" \"I have
no idea,\" Tompkins told him. \"Not impossible to figure out, though,\"
Belinda Binda said. \"Sure, given a little time,\" Mr. T. agreed. \"By
the time our first project is done, we\'ll have one data point. And
shortly afier that, a bunch more. A few years &om now, I think we\'ll be
able to answer Gabriel\'s question. We\'ll know the mean production rate
of this organization and the variation around the mean. We\'ll be able
to sort the data by project size, staff size, anything you can think of.
If we only had that data now . . .\" He drifted off, considering that
metric ideal. \"C\'mon, guys. We don\'t have to wait two years.\"
Belinda was looking at them like they were school kids. \"We can have
the data next week.\'\' \"Well, I\'d sure like to know how we\'re going
to pull that off!\" Tompkins sputtered. \"Yes, Belinda, please clue us
in.\" \"Look, there have been projects here before, scores of
projects.\" Ex-General Markov was shaking his head. \"But we don\'t have
the data, Belinda. No data. Almost none.\'\' \"I\'m sure there\'s salary
data.\" \"Well, of course there is that. We had to pay people, and that
creates records.\"

\"So we know about months of effort expended. And we know what projects
they were working on. If we don\'t remember, we can ask them.\" Gabriel
conceded her a point. \"I suppose we could establish person-months
expended for each project. We wouldn\'t know what kind of work they were
doing, but we could, I suppose, reconstruct the aggregate cost, how many
peoplemonths on each project.\" \"That\'ll do it. The aggregate is all
we need. And then we correlate it to the size in hnction points of the
products that those projects built.\" Mr.Tompkins still didn\'t see.
\"\'Where on earth do we get that?\" Belinda looked at him pointedly,
leaving a moment for him to figure out the answer for himself. He was so
worn down by the exertions of this very intense day that he could barely
keep himself awake. Just as he was facing up to how tired he was, Waldo,
the ultimate office assistant, opened the door and wheeled in a tray of
Morovian coffee. \"Ah, coffee,\" Tompkins said, thankfUl for the
interruption. Ah, reprieve. \"We\'ll calculate function points delivered
for all those old projects by looking at the products they built. We\'ll
apply the Caporous formulas to the products.\" Belinda helped herself to
a cup of coffee. \"It\'s a mountain of work, but not beyond us.\"
\"Where are we going to find the time for all that work?\" Mr. Tompkins
moaned. \"We\'re up to our armpits already in things to do.\" Belinda
was grinning. \"Hey, we\'re captains of industry here. No need to do the
work ourselves.We\'ll form a measurement team, teach them how to
calculate h c t i o n points and how to dredge up the salary data, and
send them on their way.\"

He still wasn\'t convinced. \"Where are we ever going to get someone to
take on that task? We need a specialist in data recovery. . . .
\"Archaeology,\" Belinda corrected him. \"This work is pure archaeology.
It\'s just tromping around the bones of dead projects to form a picture
of the past.\" \"Archaeology, then. Where are we ever going to find a
software archaeologist? The guy has not only got to be able to digest
the data, but he\'s got to have connections throughout the organization
to know whom to go after to get it. Where do we have to go to find such
a person?\" The ex-General was grinning. \"\'What seeketh ye abroad that
cannot be found at home?\"\' he quoted. \"What does that mean,
Gabriel?\" \"It means, look under your nose,Webster.\" Immediately under
his nose, on the desk in fiont of him, was a jumble of index cards and
tables of numbers. Waldo was busy straightening them into neat piles.
\"What? What\'s under my nose?\" \"Waldo.\" Waldo looked up. \"Me? What
about me?\" \"He is perfect,\" the ex-General said. \"You\'re perfect
for the job,Waldo. How would you like a new job?\" \"What job?\"
\"Manager of the metrics group.\" \"Me, a manager?\" \"Well, I don\'t
know about that . . . ,\" Mr. Tompkins began, slightly panicked at the
thought of losing Waldo. \"For all his good qualities,. . .\" Belinda
strode across the room. \"Of course,\" she said, taking Waldo\'s hand
and shaking it. \"Of course you can do it. Congratulations,Waldo. Poof,
you\'re a manager. That\'s all it 97

really takes. A little magic wanding by one of us, and there you are.\"
\"But . . .\" \"Don\'t you see how perfect he is, Webster? He\'s been
here forever. He knows absolutely everyone. I doubt there\'s a person in
any of the seven buildings who hasn\'t had some interaction with Waldo
by this time. And a good interaction, too. When he makes a contact, he
makes a friend. You do see it, don\'t you? He is perfect for the job.\"
Mr. Tompkins did indeed see it. He smiled a resigned smile. \"Of course.
I\'m just sorry to lose him, that\'s all.\" \"We\'re not losing him,
we\'re just putting him to work at something that can make use of all
his talents. That\'s what we do as managers. Apply people where their
skills and talents can really shine. That\'s what management is all
about.\" \"Um, what\'s going on here?\"Waldo wanted to know. \"I\'ve got
a good statistics person to help him,\" ex-General Markov contributed,
\"someone who mixes up statistics like Julia Child mixes food. We\'ll
throw in a programmer analyst, just to give the team its full complement
of the necessary skills .\" \"Um, what\'s going on?\" Tompkins told him.
\"I think you just got promoted, Waldo. Congratulations, you are now
manager of the metrics group.\" Belinda stayed on for another two hours,
helping him bring Waldo up to speed. By the time they were done, he had
pretty much mastered the function point counting rules and had a game
plan for how to conduct the s o b a r e archaeology study. He told them
confidently that he would be back to

them with data from the first past project within no more than a week.
Belinda and Webster had dinner downtown, and afterwards he walked her
back to the little park up over the harbor where she slept. He took real
satisfaction fiom the fact that Belinda seemed to be recovering from
burnout. There remained, however, a few odd quirks in her ways: She
still wouldn\'t wear shoes or sleep indoors. On a night like this, of
course, it wasn\'t hard to understand the appeal of bedding down
outdoors. The park was peacehl and quiet, the stars bright and large in
the absence of much artificial light. \"What a difference a day makes,\"
he told her. \"It was a lucky day for us that T. Johns Caporous showed
up here. I can\'t think when we\'ve made so much progress. Today, we
really got a grip on things.\" \"It\'s true. He has been a catalyst for
our thinking. But I\'ve been kicking myself all afternoon.\" \"Why on
earth?\" \"Why did we wait for him,Webster? Shame on us for not having
done that work months ago.\" \"Well, we needed his concept of hnction
points. That was an important discovery for us.\" \"Without knocking its
importance, I point out that we could have plowed on without it, if only
we\'d given ourselves a good swift kick to get started.\" \"I can\'t see
how.\" \"Think about it. Without the concept of an objective sizing
formula, we could have at least done some intelligent approximations. We
could, for example, have worked out a relative sizing scheme.\" \"Such
as?\"

\"Well, sizing the various products in terms of each other. If we
hypothesized, for example, that Quickerstill was one hundred
\'Galoobles\' of software, then couldn\'t we have figured out how big
Quirk was in Galoobles? Couldn\'t we have figured out how many
Quickerstills in a Quirk? It would involve some seat of the skirt
estimating, but if we\'d put our heads together, I think we could have
come up with a pretty good assessment.\" \"If Quickerstdl is one
hundred, I guess Quirk would be, maybe, two hundred f i e Galoobles.\"
\"More or less. And PShop would be five hundred or six hundred.\" \"But
those are just numbers pulled out of the air, just gutfeel numbers.\"
\"Yes, but once we\'d pulled them out of the air and written them down,
they could only get better. We would be obliged to refine our concept of
a Galooble, to invent some hnction metric of our own.\" \"I hardly think
we were going to invent a fundamental concept like hnction points all on
our own. Caporous and his people have been working on this for years.\"
\"Well, he was trying to solve a much harder problem than we needed to
solve. He was trying to come up with some size metric that would work
for all software, everywhere. He had to worry about hundreds of
variables that do vary over the global population, but never vary here.
Our problem was much more contained. AU we needed was some size metric
that was usefbl, just for Aidrivoli.\" \"I don\'t know how we would even
have begun,\"Tompkins said. \"Function points are a synthetic metric,
like tax bracket in the IRS code. You can\'t measure it directly; you
need to mea-

sure other things, and then apply them in a formula to derive the
synthetic. The \'other things,\' in the case of function points, are the
countable characteristics of software. Viewed &om the outside, those
would be input and output streams, database segments, data elements.
Those are the primitive metrics on which any synthetic has to depend.\"
\"Yes. . . .\" He didn\'t see where this line of thinking was headed.
\"All we had to do was speculate that there was some synthetic that
could be formed from these primitive metrics. Then, we could perform a
software archaeology study to collect the primitives along with effort
data for a dozen past projects. . . .\" \"Ah.\" He got it at last.
\"Then we just run multiple regressions, correlating combinations of the
primitives against the effort numbers.\" \"Right. Some specific
combination would emerge as best, the one that gives the least noisy
relationship to effort. That would be our unit, the Galooble, or the
Morovian Standard Unit of Work, or the Aidrivoli, or whatever we wanted
to call it.\" \"I see. You\'re right, we could have done that on our
own.\" \"By the time Caporous got here, we would have had all the
primitive data collected, and been working with our own, local synthetic
size metric. Then he would have shown us, I don\'t doubt it, a better
way to form the synthetic. So, we might have switched fi-om Galoobles to
function points to take advantage of the emerging standard, and because
it\'s probably a better metric. But in that case, the improvement would
only have been marginal. We would have had the advantage for months of
working with pretty reasonable metrics.\"

\"You\'re right. We should have done that. It\'s as plain as the nose
on your face once a T. Johns Caporous has demonstrated it for you. But
we couldn\'t see it before.\" \"Shame on us.\" \"No. Good on him. The
people who point out things that should have been obvious but weren\'t
are the ones who do the most real good. They see the simple fundamental
truths that the rest of us miss, and they help us to see them as well.\"
A long, comfortable pause: They sat quietly side-by-side absorbing the
spectacle of the night sky. \"You can see shooting stars over ths way,\"
Belinda said, afier a while, pointing out over the Ionian Sea. \"Keep
your eyes just over the green navigation light, and up about twenty
degrees.\" She turned him to face the sea. Webster looked above the
green navigation light, as instructed. He let his breath out slowly, let
his shoulders relax. The night was almost perfectly still now, the only
sound was Belinda\'s soft rustling just behind his back. Suddenly, a
long, slow arc of light trailed across the sky. \"Ooooh.\" \"Did you see
one?\" \"I did.\" \"They\'re there every night. Sometimes, I count a
dozen of them before I fall asleep.\" She put her ground cover down
beside him, and sat on it, dressed now in a flannel nightgown. He
hadn\'t considered what Belinda might sleep in, but somehow he wouldn\'t
have expected it to be a flannel nightgown. She lay back, hlly reclining
on the ground cover, arranged a light blanket over her, put her hands
behind her neck, and stared off straight up into the heavens. A long
time passed

with no need for either of them to say anything. Finally, Belinda told
him what was on her mind: \"What\'s it all about, Webster? What are we
up to here? Here I am, forty-something, and I still don\'t know what to
do with myself. What\'s enough for a life? Is it enough that we\'re
helping a little third-world country come out of the woods and develop a
world-class software industry? It\'s amusing, I know, but is it amusing
enough? Is it important enough?\" \"I think so. But I know what you
mean. I wonder, too, sometimes.\" \"We\'re helping nice, young people
build decent careers for themselves and live with a bit of dignity. . .
.\" \"And we\'re not doing any harm, not adding to pollution or building
weapons.\" \"Right. And still I wonder. Is this what I am here for on
this earth?\" \"I don\'t know. Maybe we\'ll never figure it out, what
matters, I mean.\" \"Sometimes, I think that what matters is doing
something so spectacular it will astound the world. And then, other
times, I just want to help the world. And still other times, I want to
sneak up behind the world and give it one humongous goose.\" \"To
astound, help, or goose. That is the question.\" \"Or what combination
of the three-that is the question. Maybe each of us has to find his or
her own perfect combination. Do you suppose that our career choices are
as simple as that, Webster? To find our own particular point in
AstoundHelp-Goose space?\" \"I like that. We\'re each of us a point in
that space, defined by our positions along those three axes, defined by
our values of the dimensions A, H, and G.\"

\"How many parts Michelangelo, how many parts Mother Teresa, and how
many parts . . . ?\" \"Milton Berle.\" \"Milton Berle.\" He was watching
the sky again, looking toward the green navigation light for more
shooting stars. All he had to do was keep his eyes fixed there, and sure
enough, they continued to appear. By the time he had seen three more
traces, Belinda\'s breathing had become regular and deep. He tiptoed
away so as not to disturb her, and made his way slowly back to the
Residence through the splendid summer night. From Mr.Tompkins\'Journa1:

o

Size every single product.

o

Don\'t sweat t h e units- while you\'re waiting t o achieve objective
metrification, use subjective units.

o

Form synthetic metric5 from all t h e primitives (countable
characteristics of t h e sokware) available t o you.

o

Collect archaeological d a t a t o derive productivity t r e n d s from
now-ended projects.

o

Tinker with t h e formulation f o r your synthetic metric until i t s
values give t h e best correlation t o Effort for t h e s e t p r o j e
c t s in your archaeological d a t a base.

o

Draw a trend line through your database, showing expected E f f o r t a
s a function o f values o f t h e synthetic metric.

o

Now, for each new project t o be estimated, compute value of t h e
synthetic metric and use it to pick a f f expected Effort from t h e
trend line.

o

Use t h e noise level around the product i v i t y trend a s an
indicator o f what tolerance t o apply to the projections.

F

rom the beginning, NNL had decreed that the Quicken look-alike product
would be called Quickerstill. The name caught on with the teams. Of
course, the direct result was that the performance requirement for the
product had to be bumped up in order to justify the name. Mr. T. let
that happen. He rather liked the name. He liked the suggestion that the
projects might be done \"quicker still\" than he had hoped, maybe even
quicker still than the dumb deadline imposed by Minister Belok. Sitting
in his office, Webster stared up over his shoulder at the countdown
sign, which now read:

ONLY

DAYS TILL D-DAY!

Now just a little less than a year remained till next June 1. As a
deadline for all six products, Belok\'s date was truly ludicrous. They
now knew what the average production rate was for products built over
the past five years at Aidrivoli: a little less than five hnction points
per person-month. And that was for

one-off products that didn\'t have to meet the rigors of the
shrink-wrap software market. In developing the six products, Mr. T.
knew, they\'d be lucky to achieve anything more than three function
points per person-month. That meant that a product like PShop would take
at least three years to put out the door. Three years fiom their start
date back in the winter would work out to more than six hundred days
fiom today. There was no chance of even one of the PShop teams finishing
even close to Belok\'s deadline. While Tompkins knew that the larger
projects-PShop and Paint-It and Quirk-hadn\'t a prayer of being done by
the deadline, he still harbored some hope that one of the Quickerstill
projects might be able to finish by then. That was the challenge he had
set for himself. If they achieved that, he would call his whole Morovian
venture a success. He savored that idea for a long, pleasant moment. He
might pull off some measure of success in spite of Belok. What a feat
that would be! The more he thought about it, the better he felt. Now
that they had come face to face with the awful reality of Minister
Belok\'s schedule, at least the worst was past. After all, what else
could possibly go wrong on that scale? Mrs. Beerzig, the grandmotherly
assistant who had taken over for Waldo, bustled into his office in some
distress. \"Oh, Boss. Something here you need to take a look at.
There\'s a delegation outside fiom the Morovian Software Engineering
Institute. They say they\'re here to perform an audit of the project
groups.\" \"We\'re acting on the specific instructions of Minister
Belok,\" the Audit Group manager told Tompkins. \"He has laid down the
law on this one. All these projects must be put under the

gun to demonstrate improved process. They\'re currently rated at
Capability Maturity Model Level 2. And Minister Belok wants them at
Level 3 before the end of the year. He has set that as an absolute
requirement.\" The man shook his head uneasily. \"I don\'t know if it
can be done, but he says it must.\" \"Whether it can be done or not is
not what\'s foremost in my mind,\" Tompkins told him. \"What I\'m
thinking of is, What\'s it going to cost me in lost time to put this
group through a process improvement program? We\'re up against a
deadline, you know.\" The Audit Group manager replied confidently,
\"Well, I wouldn\'t worry too much about that. Process improvement
results in productivity improvement. We know that &om the Americans.
Bumping up a single CMM level should push your productivity up by
twenty-four percent.\" \"I doubt it. But even if it is true, that
doesn\'t guarantee that the twenty-four percent increased capacity will
be available before my deadline.\" He was thinking back to Hector
Rizzoli\'s observation that there is no such thing as a shortterm &.
\"We know that process improvement programs take time, a lot of time.
So, in the short run, we lose capacity.\" The man shrugged. \"But in the
long run . . .\" \"Yes, I know. Starting someday, maybe a year from the
end of the program, some of the good things you\'ll have taught my
people may start to pay off. How long does the program take?\" \"Ten
months, maybe. We\'ll tie up your people for a day, or perhaps only half
a day, per week.\" Tompkins groaned. He didn\'t have to run the
simulation to know what this would do to the schedule. \"What\'s your
charter? Are you process-improving just these six projects, or the whole
organization?\'\'

\"Well, the whole organization. That\'s what Minister Belok wants.\" I
see.\" \"Sorry, Mr. Tompkins. I can see this is not such welcome news.
But do try to take the long view of it. I\'m sure that . . . \" Tompkins
was shaking his head in disgust. \"Well, you might take heart from this
then, Mr. Tompkins: The truth is that we\'re not ready at all to begin
the process improvement program. It will take us, maybe, six weeks
before we can even start.\" \"So, what is all this today, all these
people?\" \"We\'re just the Audit Group. The one thing we can do right
away is to determine that your organization hasn\'t slipped from CMM
Level 2. So, we need to go around and assure that everyone is indeed
using the process steps that they were certified for a year ago.\" \<c I
see.\" \"Even as many as we are, it will take us most of the day to do
just Aidrivoli-1. Then, we\'ll audit the people in the other buildings
during the rest of this week and next.\" 6\<

By the end of the day, the Au&t Group manager and a few of his
lieutenants were assembled in Mr.Tompkins\' office. They\'d brought
along with them a rather sheepish-looking Bigsby Grosz, the Quickerstill
A-Team manager. Ex-General Markov sat in. The Audit Group manager made
his report: \"Look, here\'s what we found, Mr. Tompkins. Not too bad
really, but there was one rather upsetting deviation from process;
that\'s Mr. Grosz here and his group.\" \"I\'m sure he had a good
reason. . . .\"Mr.Tompkins began.

\"Well, you know, there are always good reasons for deviating from
standard procedure. When the MSEI certified your group last year as CMM
Level 2, it was specifically confirming that the process, the set of
disciplined steps the people undertake on each project, had become
Repeatable. That\'s what Level 2 is. It\'s called Repeatable, meaning
that whether your approach is good or bad, ideal or imperfect, at least
you\'re doing it the same way each time. Now, most of your people in
Aidrivoli-1 were doing just that. We looked into six projects, all of
them in the Requirements stage, and of these, five were going about
requirements capture and documentation using the same standard
procedures they have always used on past projects. This was true of all
the projects except QuickerStill. Mr. Grosz here seems to have abandoned
the Repeatable process entirely. His group has left off the requirements
stage without even finishing the document, and gone right straight into
design!\" He said this as though it were a crime against nature. \"I\'m
sure he had his reasons,\" Mr.Tompkins repeated. \"I did,\" Grosz said.
\"I had very good reasons. Look, this is not at all like other projects
we have done. This is a project to build a look-alike to a
well-understood, well-documented, commercial product, Quicken. We had
all the documentation from that product. There was no need to build a
requirements spec at all. . . .\" \"No need to build a requirements
spec!\" the Audit Group manager sputtered. \"I have never, ever seen a
project that had no need to build a requirements spec. Never. Every
project has to build a good, thorough requirements document. Every
MSEI-certified CMM Level 2 project has to build the requirements
document using the same methods and nota-

tions it was certified as using. That\'s what it means to have a
Repeatable process.\" \"But this project is different!\" Grosz wailed.
\"All projects are different,\" the Audit Group manager shot back.
\"They\'re different, each and every one of them. But we use the same
process nonetheless.\" Tompkins ventured in. \"But suppose there is
something special about a given project that makes the certified process
not worth following?\" \"We follow it anyway,\" the MSEI man said. \"It
has to be followed. If we let people make exceptions due to the
exceptional nature of their projects, we\'d never have any
consistency.\" \"So, they have to proceed exactly the same way on each
project?\" \"Exactly the same way,\" he confirmed. \"And if they don\'t,
then they\'re not worthy to be certified as Level 2. That is not just my
opinion. That is the opinion of the MSEI.\" \"Not worthy to be certified
as Level 2,\" Mr. Tompkins considered. \"Well, maybe that\'s our answer.
Maybe you could just de-certi\* the QuickerStill project.\" \"I hardly
think that\'s the right answer, Mr.Tompkins. The MSEI is not about to
preside over any backsliding. I mean, once that sort of thing gets
started . . .\" \"Well, we could keep it all very private, just among
ourselves.\" \"I don\'t think so,\" the man said firmly. \"And I don\'t
think Minister Belok would be pleased at all by this. He wants the whole
group up to Level 3 by year-end, and here is one of his very important
projects going in exactly the opposite direction, right back to Level 1.
No sir, I am going to be issuing a written Cure Notice to Mr. Grosz and
the QuickerStill

project today. We\'re going to put them on notice that they have seven
days to get themselves back onto the straight and narrow, producing
requirements documents in the standard form. . . . Copying requirements
over from one form into the other,\" Grosz said bitterly. \" . . . in
the standard form, as I said, using the standard Level-2 process. If
they don\'t demonstrate that within seven days, then they will be
officially and publicly decertified. Do I make myself clear?\" There was
a note of menace in his voice. \"Perfectly,\" Mr. Tompkins told him.
\"Perfectly clear. Of course, this project is only a small part of my h
l l organization. I understand you\'ll be auditing the other buildings
beginning tomorrow.\" \"Yes, about one building a day, if today is any
indicator.\" \"Well, then, would you accommodate me by starting on
Aidrivoli-2 tomorrow? And then, &om there, on to Aidrivoli3 the next
day, and so on. You might as well do the buildings in numerical order,
enQng up at Aidrivoli-7 on the last day.\" That at least would give him
a few days to decide how to proceed. \"Would you do them in that order
for me?\" \"Well, sure, Mr. T. We\'re here to help. So, it\'s
Aidrivoli-2 tomorrow. I take it you\'ve got some pretty important things
going on in Aidrivoli-2 that you want us to take it next.\" \"Er, yes,
that\'s it precisely. And Aidrivoli-3 and -4, as well. All very
important work. We are intensely interested in your audits of
Aidrivoli-2 and -3 and -4, and to a lesser extent, Aidrivoli-5 and -6.
Those are key ones, so I\'d like you to do those first.\" \"You got it,
Mr.T. The MSEI won\'t let you down.\" \"I\'m sure of that.\" 9,

66

Gabriel stayed behind after the others had left. \"Looks like we\'re
even hrther behind than we thought,\" he observed. \"Well, certainly
further behind by whatever time was spent on process improvement.\"
\"No, still worse than that.\" \"Why?\" \"It is such a natural
management decision to shortcut the requirements documentation on these
look-alike projects where you have excellent user documentation &om the
commercial vendors. But Grosz was the only one who saw the opportunity
and took it. The others all knuckled down and applied themselves to
writing requirements documents just the same way they always had on
other projects, not realizing that this one was different and required a
different approach.\" Mr.Tompkins stood up. \"I see what you mean. I
think we need to wander over to Aidrivoli-7 and perform a little audit
of our own to see whether the B- and C-Teams are willing to take
sensible shortcuts or not.\" \"The user document is the requirements
spec,\" Molly Makrnora told them. \"Of course, we didn\'t copy it over
into the standard form. That would have been a total waste of time.\"
\"A total waste,\" Elem Kartak agreed. All the other B- and C-Team
managers were nodding their heads in agreement. Avril Alterbek, the
PShop C-Team manager held up her hand. \"The Photoshop manuals we got
&om Adobe are as thorough and comprehensible a statement of requirements
as I have ever seen. I never looked at a user manual before to evaluate
it as a spec, but this project has forced me to do just that. And I came
away thinking that a user manual makes one

very fine specification document. I\'m wondering why we don\'t, in
general, push up the work of writing the user manual, or at least the
guts of it, to the front of the project, and make it do double service:
act as user manual and hnctional specification. I know the others are
mostly of the same opinion, since we\'ve been comparing notes on the
subject.\" She looked around at her peer managers and they all showed
signs of agreement. \"But just because the manuals made a good hnctional
specification,\" she went on, \"didn\'t mean that we had no requirements
work to be done. There are also the nonfunctional requirements to worry
about: things like response time and file capacities and number ranges
and precision of variables and expansion characteristics.. . .\" \"We
each of us wrote up a set of nonfixnctional specifications,\" Kartak
picked up. \"Those together with the manuals made up a complete
requirements document. Its form was unorthodox, but its content was
excellent. It contained all the requirements, both functional and non-,
and it was readable, unambiguous, and hll of examples. I think our
projects have got some of the best requirements specs ever seen.\" Mr.
Tompkins was considerably relieved. The very nonstandard requirements
process they all seem to have adopted was a huge and meaninghl shortcut.
And the result of that shortcut was that all of the B- and C-Teams had
put requirements stage work to bed and were now fully involved in
design. Of course, it also meant that every single one of them would be
decertified when the Audit Group finally arrived at Aidrivoli-7. That
was his problem, not the project managers\'. Maybe this was the moment
to give them a well-deserved pat on the back,Tompkins thought. \"I\'m
delighted to see that you have been willing to approach this project in
a nonstan-

dard way. When there are intelligent shortcuts to take, we have to take
them. And you have. That shows you\'re thinking on your feet, and
that\'s what I want to see. But what I\'m wondering is, Why didn\'t my
A-Team managers all take the same shortcut?\" A moment passed while they
considered his question. \"I think I know,\"Avril suggested. \"Tell me,
please.\" \"Well, put yourself in the position of my colleague Tomas
Orik, who runs the PShop A-Team. He\'s got sixty people on his team. And
there\'s talk that the Minister of Internal Affairs has got an eye on
that project, because it\'s the one that is most stressed to deliver on
time.\" \"SO . . . ?\" \"So,Tomas is obliged to keep all his people
working. He\'s supposed to crack the whip and even make them work
overtime. Otherwise, he stands out like a sore thumb as the wrong man to
manage that effort. But what are they to do?\" Mr. Tompkins considered
the implications of Avril\'s dreadful question. He\'d have to sound out
Tomas on the subject, but he had a hunch she was onto something.
Translating requirements from one form to another wasn\'t exactly useful
work, but there was a lot of it, enough to keep all the overstaffed
teams busy, and, more important, looking busy. It was just possible they
were working in an admittedly inefficient way just to have enough work
for everyone to take part. It was still early, but he decided not to go
back to his office; he was too discouraged. His way home led him through
the perennial gardens in front of the MSEI building, but he couldn\'t
even enjoy them. The only bright spot of the day was that he had
postponed audit of the people in

Aidrivoli-7 for another week. That gave him some time to do something.
But what? From Mr. Tompkins\' Journal:

Process and Process lm\~rovement o

Good process and continually improving process are admirable goals.

o

They are also very natural goals: Good technical workers will focus on
them whether you tell them t o or not.

o

Formal process improvement programs cost time and money; a given process
improvement e f f o r t may well s e t project work back. Even if
productivity gains materialize, they are unlikely t o o f f s e t t h e
t i m e s p e n t on process improvement for those projects t h a t host
the program.

o

A project can hope t o gain enough from a single well-chosen method
improvem e n t t o repay t h e t i m e and money invested in the change.

o

Projects cannot realistically hope t o ac\~ommodatemore than one method
improvement over t h e i r duration. Multi-skill improvement programs
(for instance, increasing by an entire CMM level) are most likely t o
make projects finish l a t e r t h a n t h e y would have without the
program.

o

The danger o f s t a n d a r d process i s t h a t people will miss
chances t o take important shortcuts.

o

Particularly on overstaffed projects, standard process will be observed
rigorously a s long a s i t generates suffic i e n t work (useful o r n
o t ) t o keep everyone busy.

\' T m going to tell him to stay away from my projects.\" Mr. Tompkins
was sitting in Gabriel Markov\'s office. He punched his hand down on the
desk, hoping to imply more determination than he really felt. The
ex-General raised his eyebrows. \"You\'re going to tell that to the
Director of the Morovian SEI?\" \"I am. I\'m going over there this
afternoon to beard the lion in his den. Or her den.\" \"His.\" \"His.
Thank you. I\'m going to lay down the law to him.\" He stood and began
to pace as he talked. \"Yes, we want to invest in training and process
improvement, but not for projects on deadline. No way. That\'s final.\"
\"And you think he\'s going to agree to that?\" \"I\'m not going to give
him any choice.\" \"He\'s likely to mention this to Minister Belok.
He\'ll have to because it is Belok who has told him to start the process
improvement program. Are you ready to take Belok on?\"

Mr.Tompkins shook his head emphatically no. \"I\'m going to tell the
Director to stay away from my projects and not mention it to Belok. I\'m
going to tell him this with so much conviction and persuasiveness that
he will just have to agree. I think it\'s going to work.\" \"I don\'t
think SO.\" \"Neither do I.. . .But I have to try.\" \"Webster, my good
friend, this is going to be a very tough sell. The Director\'s
motivations are almost precisely the opposite of yours. He doesn\'t care
much about the projects-he will tell you that your focus on the projects
alone is too shortterm-what he cares about is the long term and the
skills and aptitudes of our people. And, he honestly believes that his
various process improvement programs will help. I have the occasional
doubt about some of this myself, but he believes in what he is doing. He
is a very sincere man.\" \"So, help me. How do I say what I need to
say?\" \"I will help you practice a bit. Try it out on me. I am the
Director. Pretend I am the Director. Give me your spiel.\" \"Now see
here . . . um, what is his name?\" \"Menotti. Prospero Menotti.\" \"Now
see here, Mr. Menotti . . .\" \"It\'s Dr. Menotti. Everybody is a doctor
here. Even me, I am Dr. ex-General Markov.\" \"Okay. Doctor. How about
this: You many think, Dr. Menotti-and I don\'t doubt your sincerity in
thinlung this thing that I\'m about to utterly demolish because it is
the dumbest thing that any thinking person has ever thought to think
of-that process improvement-I mean, Just who do you think you are,
coming in and disrupting my projects, probably costing us weeks or
months off our schedule, weeks or months that we certainly can\'t
afford, and I know this

because we have these simulations that prove conclusively that the kind
of woolly-headed fuzzy-thinking . . .\" The good Dr. ex-General was
shalung his head. \"You are too angry, Webster. Now, just indulge me for
a moment. Tell me what you feel about Dr. Menotti, not what you think,
but what you feel.\" \"I feel he is a woolly-headed, fuzzy-thinker,
thinking up woolly-headed hzzy ideas and then imposing them,
institutionalizing his dumb notions willy-nilly on innocent people for
some kind of misguided, totally bureaucratic concept of. . . Why are you
looking at me that way?\" Webster, you never even met the guy. A minute
ago, you didn\'t even know his name, and you hate him.\" \"Meddling
so-and-so.\" \<\< How are you going to convince somebody when you don\'t
like him?\" Mr. Tompkins paused for a moment to consider that one. Of
course, Gabriel was right. \"Oh. I guess you\'re saying that if I let my
dislike show, then he probably won\'t do what I want him to do.\" \"That
is certainly true.\" \"And I was letting my dislike show?\" \"I\'ll
say.\" \"Well, that\'s a good point. I will have to be careful to keep
my feelings for the man under wraps. I\'m certainly capable of that.
1\'11 do it. Thank you for that advice, Gabriel.\'\' \"That was not my
advice at all. And you are probably not capable of keeping your feelings
under wraps anyway. Webster, think about this as a management problem.
You are our boss here and a damn good one. We are all falling over each
other to do the things you want us to do. Do you think that\'s because
you have authority over us?\" 66

\"Isn\'t it?\" \"No. Wake up, dummy. Your power comes from something
else entirely.\" \"You\'re saying, people do what I want because they
like me? Maybe that\'s true, but how can I get Dr. Menotti to . . .\"
\"It\'s not because they like you. It\'s because you like them.\"
\"Huh?\" \"You like and respect the people who work for you. You care
about them. Their problems are your problems; their concerns are yours.
You have a heart as big as a train and it shows. You give trust before a
person has really demonstrated trustworthiness. You make us all feel
like you\'ve adopted us into your family. That\'s why we follow you.\"
\"Well.\" Mr.Tompkins wasn\'t quite sure what to say next. \"That\'s
your power,Webster. If you use it on Dr. Menotti, you might just come
away with what you need. I don\'t guarantee it, because it is going to
be a bitter pill for him to swallow. But at least you\'ll have a
chance.\" \"I have to like him?\" \"You do. You can\'t convince anyone
whom you don\'t like. Some people can, but you can\'t. Don\'t fight
it.\" \"How can I like him? I mean, I can\'t just make myself like
someone, just because it might help.\" \"I don\'t know,Webster. But I
think it\'s your only hope.\" The building housing the Institute was at
the very center of the Aidrivoli complex. It was a handsome stone
edifice, four stories tall. The sign in front read \"Morovian S o h a r
e Engineering Institute,\" but the letters cut in stone over the main
entrance gave the building a different name. They read:

Mr. Tompkins looked back and forth between the two names, wondering
about the difference. Just inside the entrance, he found a large
portrait that gave at least part of the answer. The man shown in the
portrait was tall, with a pleasant angular face and a shock of white
hair. There was something faintly bemused about his expression,
especially in the eyes and one corner of the mouth. It was as if he were
aware of something terribly funny and was just about to grin. Under the
portrait, there was a plaque that read, \"Aristotle Kenoros-Morovia\'s
First Programmer.\" Dr. Menotti\'s office was on the third floor. When
he was shown in, Mr. Tompkins found himself shaking hands with a
surprisingly young man of medium build and a cheerful expression. \"Mr.
Tompkins. So, we meet at last. What a pleasure. I have heard so many
good things . . .\" \"Dr. Menotti.\" Tompkins withdrew his hand and
stood stiffly, his stomach in a knot. \"So many good things. This
dynamic model you have been running-well, it\'s quite the talk all
around the campus. I do hope you\'ll be willing to show me through it
one day. A brand-new approach for me, I\'d never heard of such a thing.
I am just delighted at the innovation. And, we\'ve all heard about your
splendid accomplishment in getting Belinda Binda engaged in doing good
work again. What a waste it was to have her idle, a human tragedy and a
great loss to our industry, but now she\'s turned quite around, thanks
to you. And all the projects now staffed and on their way . . .Well,
you\'ve had yourself a busy few months.\" \"I, too, have been hearing
some nice things about you, Dr. Menotti. Ex-General Markov has told me.
. .\" \"Isn\'t that man a treasure? His people love him, you know. They
really do. He is a real people-person. Well, please

do sit down. I have asked one of my coworkers to send out for some
cakes and a pot of tea.\" \"I\'m &aid I\'ve come on a rather distressing
errand.\" \"Oh, I know. I know. I\'ve heard about the audit.\"
\"Frankly, it\'s not just that.\" The Director shook his head
sympathetically. \"I can imagine. You know, you\'re not the first who\'s
had some rnisgivings about what we do.\" \"NO, but in this case . . .\"
\"Well, let\'s just put it on hold for a while, till we\'ve had our tea.
Oh, here\'s the tea.\" An elderly man in a blue smock was wheeling a tea
tray toward them. \"Yes, put it down right there on the corner table,
Mario. Yes, that\'s fine. Now, Mr. Tompkins, just put yourself in that
comfortable chair, that one right there, and tell me something about
yourself. How are you settling? And how are you finding our little
country?\" It was nearly an hour before Mr. Tompkins made his pitch. By
that time, he both liked and respected the Director, so he thought he
might just have a chance. \"Prospero, I\'m sure you know this already, a
process improvement effort may have a positive effect in the long run,
but in the short run, it has costs.\" \"So true,\" the Director agreed
amiably. \"Over the lifetime of a project, you may very well end up
behind, since you pay for the improvement effort in time and effort
lost. . . .\" \"Let\'s say \'invested.\"\' \"The time you\'ve invested
in process improvement is time that was not available to do project
work. So, you have paid the cost but the benefit hasn\'t started to kick
in yet. Just for the purposes of that one project, you come out
behind.\"

The Director nodded. \"That can certainly happen.\" \"And, as you know,
we have six projects that are under immense pressure. I was just
thinlung . . .\" \"Well, of course. I knew what you were thinking when
the receptionist announced you.\" \"So, you\'ll do it then, exempt the
project work fi-om the improvement program?\" Dr. Menotti smiled,
somewhat sadly. \"Webster, the deadline that these projects are toiling
under is impossible anyway. Everybody in Aidrivoli knows that\--every
manager and every programmer and every secretary. The projects are going
to come in very late because the schedule is very wrong. So, what
difference does an extra few months make? The little bit of your
people\'s time we take to make real improvements in their methods may
cause the projects to be twenty months late rather than eighteen. Does
it really matter? The skills we\'ll be working on will be quantification
skills, the very ones that will make future projects less likely to
begin with such unreasonable schedules. You can see, fi-om my point of
view . . . \"Yes, I do understand your perspective, Prospero. And it\'s
a good one. But, you see, there is one thing that you\'ve said that is
only very slightly wrong. You said that everybody knows that the
projects will be late. The truth is that everybody knows that but me.\"
\"Ah.\" \"And I know that most of the projects won\'t make Minister
Belok\'s ludicrous deadline, but I do have hopes that one project might
just be able to sneak in under the wire.\" \"And you have a lot of
self-esteem riding on that.\" \"I do. I\'m not sure how I let that
happen, but I have.\" \"I see.\" The Director looked away for a moment
out the window. With his eyes still averted, he said, \"Perhaps we could
37

agree to overlook that one project. Afier all, with such a big
improvement program under way, it is only reasonable that one little
project might slip through the cracks, only to be picked up later.\" He
turned back to face his visitor. Again, the sad look. Mr.Tompkins sat
back in his chair. He had been offered a fair and reasonable compromise.
It hadn\'t been easy; the man\'s expression showed that it was a painful
concession he was offering. Simple fairness now required that he accept
the Director\'s offer, but he couldn\'t. He needed to protect the other
projects as well, all of them, most particularly the secret ones in
Aidrivoli-7. He knew most of them weren\'t going to be able to finish on
Belok\'s schedule, but he still had all of his pride on the line to meet
his original November date. He had to ask for more. \"Thank you for
making that offer, Prospero. I see that it didn\'t come easy, and I do
appreciate it. But I need more. I have to ask for all six of the
projects to be excepted, and the entire division now housed in
Aidrivoli-7. I ask you to limit the process improvement program to the
other five buildings, where, of course, we shall cooperate to the
utmost.\" \"My fiiend, I don\'t really see how . . .\" \"And fbrther, I
need to ask you to make these exceptions and somehow not feel the need
to mention them to Minister Belok. That\'s what I need.\" \"You want me
to neglect a third of the staff, and not even mention it?\" \"Yes.\" \"I
can\'t do that\'webster. I just couldn\'t.\" A sorry shaking of the
head. \"You know, the MSEI does not impose these programs. We are only a
service group. We do what our client organizations ask of us. I\'m
afiaid you need to take this up directly with Minister Belok.\"

A long silence. This had been, as Gabriel had pointed out, a bit of a
long shot. But taking things up with Minister Belok was not even a long
shot; it was &tile. Oh, well, he had only one more card to play, so he
played it. \"I know this sounds terrible, but is there any way to go
around you? I mean, is there anyone above the Director here?\" Dr.
Menotti looked slightly startled. \"What made you think that there might
be?\" Mr. Tompkins pointed up toward the ceiling. \"There\'s a fourth
floor. Usually the controlling officer has his office on the top
floor.\" An extended moment to ponder. Finally, the Director said, \"Mr.
Tompkins. Suppose I do give you access to my superior. And suppose
further that that superior should accede to your request. Would you be
prepared to make a concession to me in return? I refer to something that
has nothing to do with what we have been discussing.\" \"Name your
terms.\" \"Montifiore. We have followed with fascination your new
archaeological data collection experiment and your inspired choice of
Waldo Montifiore to lead it. We have nothing like that at the Institute.
We want him. If I give you the access you wish, will you transfer Waldo
Montifiore and his entire group over to me?\" Tompkins laughed in
relief. \"Willingly. I would be delighted to do that.\" The Director
looked at him oddly. \"You would be \'delighted\' to lose such a good
man?\" \"No, it\'s not losing him that I\'d be delighted about. His loss
would be a real inconvenience to us, but think of it &-om Waldo\'s point
of view. For him, it is a triumph-the beginning of a w o n d e d new
career.\"

Dr. Menotti nodded appreciatively. \"Yes. I think you\'re right. I am
pleased that you look at the transfer in this way, pleased and rather
charmed. Of course, we will make sure that Waldo carries on doing the
work that you\'ve already chartered him to do.\" A significant pause.
\"There is someone above you then, Prospero? Someone upstairs?\" \"Oh,
yes. The president of the Institute. He maintains a very low profile. In
fact, he almost never even shows up. The position is largely honorific.
When he does come here, it\'s often just to take an afternoon nap. He\'s
up there now.\" \"I\'ll wake him. His name is . . . ?\" \"Aristotle
Kenoros.\" Dr. Menotti instructed him to make his way up to the top
floor by himself. There was no need for anyone to phone ahead, he said.
In fact, Kenoros had no phone. Mr-Tompkins headed up the stairs. What he
found on the fourth floor was one enormous dark room, an office with no
lights. The windowed wall to his right was entirely closed off by
drapes. There was a soft hum in the room, the sound of a humidifier, he
thought, but aside from that-nothing, only silence. The air was fiesh
and cool, and had a faint odor of moist earth. After pausing a moment
for his eyes to adjust, he could see that the room was hll of planting;
there were potted plants and trays of cuttings and seedlings and
glassed-in plant beds on nearly every surface. In the far corner of the
room he could now make out a narrow daybed. There was a prone figure on
the bed, under a blanket. He could see a shock of white hair, a bit of
movement.

\"Mr. Kenoros?\"Tompkins ventured. \"Mr. Kenoros, I am Webster
Tompkins.\" \"At last. I thought you\'d never get here\" \"I . . .\" The
figure in the dark sat up and stretched. \"Hey, why have we got all the
curtains closed? We have work to do.\" He jumped to his feet and threw
back the curtains. \"So, Mr. Tompkins is the manager of the whole
shebang here. And he needs a little help. So, he comes to Kenoros. Of
course. Who else to go to, really? But where was he last week and last
month? He couldn\'t use a little help then, too? I am up here dying of
boredom, wishing he would come for something. So, at last, now he is
here. Tell me, Mr. Tompkins, how can I help?\" \"Um, well, let me just
give you a little bit of background.\" \"No background. Tell me what you
want me to do.\" Tompkins took a deep breath. \"Write a letter to
Minister Belok saying that you are personally taking on the process
improvement of the people in Aidrivoli-1 and -7. Say that they are
already at Level3 and will soon be at -4. All you need is to be left
alone to do this work your own way\" Kenoros considered. \"This will
cost you dearly,\" he said. \"Anything.\" \"A job.\" \"A job?\" \<\< A
job. I can program, debug, design, review, analyze, specifi, plan,
estimate, and document. I have been doing these things since 1954. I am
very, very good at what I do. I am so good that they made me president
of this Institute. But I am bored to tears up here. So, give me work.\"
\"Give me the letter and I\'ll give you the job.\" \"It\'s a deal.\"

\"Mr. Kenoros, I think this is going to be the beginning of a
beautifixl friendship.\" 46

So you see, we have eighteen project teams, working on six different
products. For each product, there are three competing teams, each trying
to build the product better and faster than the others. What I want you
to do,Aristotle, is to rove around those eighteen projects being my
technical eyes and ears. I want you to look for whatever should be done
to give those projects, each one of them, the best chance of success. I
speculate that there is at least one thing you could do for each of
them, probably a different thing on each project, that would help it
most. I want you to go into that project and teach them how to do that
one thing that they need to do.\" \"A piece of cake.\" \"Oh?\" \"Easy.\"
\"Well, I don\'t know about that.\" \"I\'m going to go to eighteen
different project teams, but I\'m going to teach them all the same one
thing.\" \"You know that already?\" \"Oh, yes.\" \"How could you
possibly know that?\" \"Think about what we are up against here,
Webster. All the projects have got impossible or nearly impossible
deadlines, as you have told me.\" \"That\'s for sure.\" \"That means we
have to save time. But-most people miss this-you can\'t save time by
adding things to do.\" \"I beg your pardon?\" \"The so-called process
improvement that occupies Prosper0 and all his nice people downstairs is
mostly additive.

They see a less-than-ideal process and they think, \'Add this skill or
that procedure and the result will be improved.\' That is process
improvement as practiced on the first, second, and third floors. Of
course, it is usefbl stuff they add; I don\'t mean to knock it. But
process improvement as practiced here on the fourth floor is different.
My theory is that you have to think not about adding but about
subtracting.\" \"I\'m fascinated.\" \"Let\'s think about one of your
projects,Webster. Let\'s say we\'re going to start with the Quirk
B-Team. We speculate there is one thing that needs to be improved. Okay?
Right now, they are not doing that one thing. They\'re not doing it. Not
at all.\" A pause for effect. \"So, what are they doing instead?\" \"I
don\'t know. Some other thing.\" \"They are not loafing.\" \"Certainly
not!\" \"So, we have to look at what they are doing and figure out a way
to subtract some of it. So, really, what are they doing?\" \"I don\'t
know.\" \"Imagine you got to look every day at all of the people on the
project just for a minute at, say, three o\'clock. Then you categorize
all your findings for all of the people over the whole life of the
project. What are most of the people doing most of the time?\"
\"Debugging, I guess. That seems to be the biggest category of work.\"
\"That\'s our challenge then. We have to subtract some of that debugging
time.\" \"We have to learn how to do debugging more efficiently?\"
\"No,\" Kenoros corrected him. \"We have to learn how to do design more
efficiently.\" 88,

What Kenoros proposed to teach the eighteen teams was a technique he
called Last Minute Implementation, and it scared the hell out of
Tompkins. The scheme involved deferring coding as long as possible,
spending the middle forty percent or more of the project doing an
elaborate, exaggeratedly detailed low-level design, one that would have
perfect one-toone mappings to the eventual code. It was this time spent
on design that was supposed to result in a much reduced need for
debugging. In a project that was destined to last a year, for example,
no coding would be allowed until the last two months. No testing would
be done until well after that. That meant that when testing did begin,
virtually every test had to pass. There was almost no time allocated for
debugging. \"How can we run a project with no time for debugging?\"
Tompkins asked incredulously. \"The amount of time spent on debugging is
a function of the number of bugs,\" Kenoros replied, as though he were
talking to an idiot. \"Yes, but no time spent on debugging implies that
we need to have . . .\" \"No bugs. You got it. You\'re all right; you
catch on quick.\" \"No bugs!\" \"That\'s what you just said.\" \"How can
we have no bugs?!?\" \"Look, think about a bug you have just found in a
module. Where\'s the bug?\" \"In the module.\" \"No. It\'s on the edge
of the module. On the very edge. Oh, sure, there are some easy bugs in
the middle, totally local to that one module, but those are the ones
that get picked up easily in inspections. The real bugs, the ones that
take up your

time, are the ones that have something to do with the interface between
that module and the rest of its world.\" \"Right. Everybody knows that.
So what?\" \"So, when you find that bug, during debugging, you are
looking at the wrong thing.\" \"What am I looking at?\"Tomphns asked in
some exasperation. \"You are looking at the module, at its inside. You
are looking into the code.\" \"What should I be looking at?\" \"At the
design. The design is where you have all the information about
interfaces arrayed in front of you.\" \"But we try to get the defects
out when we review the designs. We already do that. Then, an enormous
amount of debugging work is required to pull out the defects that slip
though anyway.\" \"Wrong.\" \"Wrong? Wrong that bugs slip through design
review?\" \"No, wrong that you really try to get them out during
design.\" \"How can you possibly say that?\" \"I know that because I
know from these years I have been knocking about that almost nobody ever
does a design that gets close enough to the actual code to allow
sensible review.\" \"Well, of course we do design. Everybody does.\"
\"Of course. But they don\'t do it at design time. At design time, the
team puts together a document. There is a bit of hand-waving about
\'philosophy\' and maybe a file layout or two, and then a proforma
review. What they\'re doing is whatever it takes to get management off
their backs so they can get on with the coding. Finally, the manager
says okay. You can get on to the next part. The team rejoices and puts
the socalled design on a shelf where it is never consulted again. It\'s
pure shelf-ware. 177

\"Then, while they are coding, they do the real design. While they are
coding! That is when they decide what the actual modules will be and the
actual interfaces. And those are the decisions that escape review.\"
Mr.Tompkins let out a long breath of air. He hated where this was
leading. \"Of course, it is true that most low-level design gets done
pretty much as you say.\" \"Of course.\" \"But that\'s low-level
design.\" \"What you call high-level design is just hand-waving.\" \"I
don\'t know. My gut-feel tells me that you\'re at least mostly right
about this, but . . .\" \"Sure I\'m right. Low-level design is the only
thing that is real. The other, the so-called conceptual design, is just
for show.\" \"I think you\'re right, but suppose you\'re not? I have to
worry about that, don\'t I? Suppose I do what you\'re suggesting and
you\'re not right.\" Aristotle Kenoros looked at him cheeddly. \"Then
you\'re screwed.\" \"That\'s what I\'m worried about.\'\' What a case of
managerial nerves he was going to have if he actually did this. He would
delay coding, delay and delay and delay, leaving all the closure till
the very end. Then, if it didn\'t come together, if there were a ton of
bugs anyway . . . \"Tell me, Aristotle. Who on earth dreamed up this
crazy scheme?\" \"A guy.\" \"You?\" \"No, not me. Some other guy. I
don\'t know his name. I\'ve been doing this for years, but it was this
other guy who dreamed it up.\"

\"We don\'t even know his name?!?\" \"No. He\'s on the Internet. We
exchange messages all the time. He is some kind of oracle, but he
doesn\'t give his name. I can give you his ID, though. Ask him
yourself.\" He scrawled a line on a piece of paper and handed it to
Tompkins. Tompkins shoved the little piece of paper into his pocket and
headed home. From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

Changing t h e Wav Work G e t s Done o

There is no way t o get projects t o perform substantially beyond t h e
norm without making large reductions in the t o t a l amount of
debugging time.

o

Hig h-performing projects spend proportionately f a r less of their time
in debugging.

o

High-performing projects spend proportionately f a r more of their time
in design.

Mr-Tompkins put down his pen. All of that was certainly true enough.
Since debugging could take up as much as fifty percent of total project
resources, projects that managed to achieve wonders could only do that
by \"subtracting\" most of the need for debugging. That would leave them
with a relatively higher proportion of design time. There was no arguing
with that. But it didn\'t really prove that the converse was true, that
increasing design time would necessarily result in fewer bugs. The point
that he wanted to write down next in his journal

was, \"Spending more time on design allows still greater amounts of
time to be saved during debugging.\" But he really didn\'t know if that
were true: That was where a leap of faith was needed. He was going to
have to trust Aristotle Kenoros on that one, or go it alone. He still
didn\'t know which it was going to be. If he did decide to go along with
Aristotle\'s prescription, he was going to have near mutiny in the
ranks. Programmers are addicted to debugging. They weren\'t going to
take easily to this radical new scheme. He would have to spend most of
his time from now on hearing out their doubts, reassuring them, and
asking for their indulgence and trust. That at least was something he
suspected he could handle. There was reason to believe he might even
have a bit of talent along those lines. He thought back to Gabriel\'s
startling compliment earlier in the day. Even now, the memory of the
ex-General\'s warm sentiments made him feel good. He could still hear
the words, \"That\'s why we follow you, Webster. That\'s your power.\"
Mr. Tompkins picked up his pen to make one more journal entry:

o

You can\'t get people t o do anything different w i t h o u t caring f o
r t h e m and about them. To get them t o change, you have t o
understand (appreciate) where they\'re coming from and why.

He closed the journal book and picked up Kenoros\'s letter. It said
precisely what he had asked for. At least he would have Minister Belok
off his back for a while. He\'d send the letter off to Korsach by
courier first thing in the morning.

9

etting Belok off his back was not something to be done once and then
forgotten. Kenoros\'s letter had bought him a few weeks of respite, but
then at the end ofAugust, Mr.Tompkins was summoned again. He had a 1
P.M. appointment in Korsach. On the way up to Belok\'s office,Mr. T.
wandered past the office suite occupied by NNL, hoping that Himself
might be back in town. He figured he had a few markers to call in with
NNL, maybe enough to have Belok refocused onto some other poor soul
somewhere. But the suite was closed up. A hand-lettered note on the door
said, \"NNL stateside seeing to completion of new house. Back by June 1
.\" June first had been nearly three months ago. Oh, well, nice to see
at least that it wasn\'t just software people who missed their scheduled
delivery dates. He looked at his watch and hurried on. Belok\'s
receptionist led Mr. T. back though several ornate rooms to the
minister\'s secretary. The secretary led him through several more ornate
rooms to the minister\'s aide. And the aide led him back to the
minister\'s office. There, Belok

looked up at Tompkins\' entry and then, without saying anything, looked
back down again at some papers on his desk. He read them thoroughly,
frowning as he did. At last he looked up. \"Tompkins, you and your
goddamned people are costing me \$31.5 million a year. And what the hell
am I getting for it?\" \"Progress.\" \"Progress, indeed. Pfeeuuu. What
the hell can I do with progress? Can I sell it?\" \"Eventually. When the
products are delivered, as you said yourself, you\'re going to be taking
in a mint. \$31.5 million for a few years doesn\'t strike me as an
unreasonable investment for . . .\" Belok silenced him with a wave of
the hand. \"You\'d better be on schedule with those products. You don\'t
want to be here in fkont of me if you are not. It would be one damn
sorry day for you if you had to stand here and tell me that you weren\'t
going to make the June first delivery for all six products. One very,
very sorry day, indeed. I am not kidding about this. Now, are you on
schedule?\" \"Sure,\" he said, his voice flat. \"I don\'t believe you
for a second. If I did, I would move up the date. No, you\'re late, I
don\'t doubt it. But you\'re going to make up the time, Mr.Tompkins, I
assure you, you are. You are going to begin putting the screws on.\"
\"Well, people are already working pretty hard.\" Minister Belok\'s
expression turned from unpleasant to poisonous. \"You call this working
hard? Look at this.\" He shoved a sheet of paper under Mr.Tompkins\'
nose. \"Um, what is this? Overtime hours? You\'re keeping track of how
many hours of unpaid overtime my people put in?\"

\"I certainly am. These are the figures &omJuly. Look at this pitifid
portrait of six projects, piddling their time away. Notate: 144 overtime
hours; Quirk: 192; PShop: 601. . . . Pitifbl! Six hundred measly hours
of overtime &om our most aggressively scheduled project. That works out
to barely ten hours of overtime per person on that project for a whole
month! And, across your whole organization, Tompkins, do you know what
the average per-person overtime was in July? Do you know what it was?\"
\"I haven\'t a clue.\" \"Less than TWO GODDAMNED HOURS.\" \"I\'m amazed
it\'s that high. Most of the people in Markov\'s division, for example,
don\'t even have any real work to do.\" \"Well, give them work,
Tompkins. Wake up here. Put them on the PShop project.\" \"All thirteen
hundred and fifty of them?\" \"I don\'t care how many of them there are.
Get them working. And I don\'t mean regular forty-four hour weeks
either. I want to see people working sixty hours, seventy hours, eighty
hours a week. That\'s what I want and I am used to getting what I want.
Do I make myself clear?\" \"Oh, yes. I\'ve never had any trouble
understanding you.\" \"Thank god for small favors. Now, I see that you
are proceeding satisfactorily with the process improvement program. I
want that kept up. I\'m changing the target to Level 4 by the end of the
year, and then next year, I am going to . . .\" \"Excuse me, Allair, do
you know what Level 4 entds? I mean, are you up to speed on the specific
skills that people will have to acquire?\"

\"Details. Don\'t bother me with details. Your organization will
increase by one or two levels a year through the year 2000 or my name is
not Belok. Again, do I make myself clear?\" \"Quite.\" There is no place
for complacency in my operations, Tompkins. I want every man who works
for me to . . .\" Excuse me: \'man and woman.\"\' \"What?!?\" \"There
are women, too. Both men and women working here. You remember women . .
.\" Of course, there are women! What the hell are you muttering about?
Why are you going on about women? We\'ve got work to do. Products to put
out. People to keep in line. What was I saying?\" \"You want every man
who works for you . . .\" Mr. Tompkins prodded him. \"Oh, yes. I want
every man who works for me to be reminded on a daily basis of his
inadequacy. That is what keeps the work going. That is the essence of
running a tight ship. Rub their noses in it. I want to see a specific
nose-rubbing plan from you, in writing, by the close of business hours
today.\" \"I guess that means by midnight?\"Tompkins asked bitterly.
\"Right.\" Minister Belok dismissed that matter with a wave of the hand.
\"Now, as to your responsibilities in regard to the Summer Games . . .\"
\"Excuse me?\" \"The Summer Games, the year 2000 Olympics. They\'re to
be held here in Korsach.\" \"What? What are you talking about?\" \"The
Olympic Games. NNL stopped in at Olympic headquarters in between his
other projects and made the deal. L\<

66

66

He can be quite persuasive, what with all the resources he can bring to
bear. We\'ll be hosting the Olympics for the year 2000. That is your
personal year 2000 problem.\" \"My problem?\" \"You bet it\'s your
problem. I am delegating a major responsibility to you, and it\'s going
to have to be ready in time for the Games.\" He stood up and began
gathering his papers together. The interview was evidently done. \"Now,
wait a minute. I only signed up for . . .\" Belok gave him a look of
barely contained hry. \"Don\'t you tell me what you signed up for. I
will tell you what you signed up for.\'\' \"He wants us to build an
entirely new Air Traffic Control system in time for mid-summer, 2000.\"
Belinda rolled her eyes. \"He says we\'re going to have 2.4 d o n people
coming through the Korsach airport during a six-week period. That works
out to something like three hundred takeoffs and three hundred landings
a day.\" \"Erghh. How many takeoffs and landings do we have now at
Korsach?\" \"Six a week. I checked. We don\'t even have a tower. They
bring the planes in with flags.\" \"So, we need to design and build a
tower, acquire and train controllers, build support systems, integrate
the whole ball of wax. I don\'t know if we can possibly do all that. Did
you make him understand about the risks?\" \"C\'mon. My life is too
short to spend precious minutes on such a hopeless task. This is
Minister Belok, remember? Besides, I\'ve been thinking: Where does our
interest lie in all

this? We have people available in Gabriel\'s s h o p w h y not put them
to work? It\'s going to spread you and me and Gabriel a bit thin over
the next few months while we set the project in motion, but if we do
nothing more than start a meaningf%l Air Traffic Control system project
and keep our people working on it for a few years, there will still be
benefits. Think of the people working on the project. Think of the
experience they\'ll be getting.\" She shrugged agreeably. \"I\'m game if
you are.\" \"Oh, by the way, Minister Belok also wants us to begin
\'turning the screws,\' his term. He wants us to get people to work
overtime.\" \"I\'ve been meaning to talk to you about just that. I\'ve
been looking at the figures for August. Overtime hours are way up, at
least for our eighteen key projects.\" \"Whatever they are, I doubt
they\'ll be enough to suit Belok.\" \"No, probably not. Frankly, I\'m
not too happy with the figures either.\" \"You think our people should
be putting in more overtime?\" \"Less.\" \"Belinda!\" \"I know, I know.
Good projects always have a certain amount of overtime. But the trend
here is not what I consider healthy. Overtime is rising too early, so it
can never be sustained. I worry that we\'re going to peak before the
projects are ready for maximum effort and then dribble off as people
burn out and leave. That\'s what my gut tells me.\" Mr. Tompluns
delivered his usual response to such observations. \"We need to capture
what your gut is telling you, Belinda, and put it into the form of a
model. Let\'s work on

that this afternoon. We\'ll model as best we can what the effects of
overtime and pressure are on production rate, how much people produce as
a function of how hard they\'re pushed.\" \"I\'m game for that, too,\"
Belinda said. \"While we\'re at it, let\'s put Waldo to work on the same
thing.\" \"Waldo? What\'s he going to do?\" \"Look back over his
archaeological data and extract projects conducted under high and low
pressure and look at how their production rates were affected. We can
use his data to refine and tune our own model.\'\' A few hours later,
Belinda had come up with an effects-ofpressure model, but it was so
tentative in her mind that she wasn\'t even willing to key it in to the
simulator. Instead, she sketched it on Webster\'s white board. She drew
her own model next to what she proposed was the mental model inside
Belok\'s head:

\"Let\'s hypothesize some metric of pressure,\" she began. \"It might
include an indication of how the eventual delivery date compares to the
date first imposed on the project. And, it might also have some
component of overtime built into it. It is a synthetic indicator of
Pressure. Call it I?

\"Now, my model says that increasing P initially gives you a pretty big
hit of productivity. People in our business like pressure and they
respond to it, at least to a bit of it. They knuckle down and really
tear into the work. My model says that moderate amounts of pressure
might give you a twenty-five percent improvement in productivity and
even a twenty-five percent decrease in total time to deliver. But
that\'s only true if you apply the pressure moderately. A little more
pressure, and the curve flattens out-that pressure does no good at all.
And then a little more, and you start to lose ground. People tire out,
they burn out, they lose heart. More still and you begin to lose them;
if you really turn the screws, people leave in droves and the project
goes down the toilet.\" She turned her attention next to what she
presumed was Belok\'s model. \"Here we see an alternative view. This is
the view of someone who is a \'management is just kicking ass\' kind of
manager, a real fascist. He believes that pressure gives you a huge
improvement in work accomplished, maybe halving the time to get the
project done, or reducing it by pressure than that, the model even more
than half. asserts, does no good-people just have no capacity to go
faster-but it does no harm either. Since you can\'t know where the knee
of the curve is, you should err on the side of applying too much
pressure, rather than too little. The more you turn the screws, the more
sure you are that they\'re working as hard as they possibly can. You
apply pressure by setting a ludicrous date, and even though they miss
the date by a year or more, you have kept them working at the maximum
possible productive rate.\" \"You and Minister Belok seem to agree only
on the first two percent of the curve.\" \"Nobody can be one hundred
percent wrong, not even Belok.\"

ore

Webster stared at Belok\'s curve uncomfortably. No wonder the man
behaved the way he did, if that was really what he believed. \"He seems
to think that developers only work hard under punishing pressure; the
earlier you want the product, the more punishment you need to apply.\"
\"Punishment . . .\" Belinda stumbled backward, away from the board. She
sat down abruptly, her face slightly pale. She stared up at the graph
for a long moment, and finally said, \"Ugh.\" \"What?\" \"Punishment.
That is the graph of a child abuser,Webster. That is an abusive parent.
Instead of pressure, let P stand for punishment. . . .\" She went back
to the Belok graph and relabeled the axes. \"And on the vertical,
instead of Time to Deliver, we\'ll show Misbehavior.

\"That\'s the view of the world that drives an abusive
don\'tspare-the-rod parent,\" Belinda continued. \"Don\'t you see? The
more and harder the kid is spanked, the less and less he misbehaves.
Until finally, extra punishment doesn\'t help anymore; the kid is maxed
out. But the extra punishment, no matter how much, doesn\'t do any real
harm either. So the parent reasons: \'Might as well lay it on hard.\'
Ugh.\" Mr. T. went over to the board and erased the tail of the curve.
Then he redrew it rising up sharply. He could feel the

tension beginning to drain out of Belinda as he did. \"Overpunished
kids don\'t behave better,\" he told her gently. \"They behave worse,
even much worse.\" \"Of course. They just learn to hide it better.\"
\"Of course.\" \"Erase the damn thing,Webster. It\'s too depressing.\"
He erased the Belok graph. Belinda looked a bit drawn still. He crossed
over and took the chair by her side. Time to lighten things up a bit.
\"Speaking of hiding bad behavior, Seafood, my old pussycat, does that.
He knows he is not allowed to sharpen his claws on the Oriental rug. But
he does. Only, when he does it, because he knows it\'s naughty, he lays
his ears back. And he keeps an eye on me in case I might yell at him or
throw the paper.\" She remained serious. \"That\'s exactly how an
overpunished kid will act. He knows what\'s bad, but has no compunction
about doing it. No moral sense at all. His only concern is how to get
away with it.\" The cat story had not led exactly where he\'d wanted.
\"Of course, I never punished Seafood,\" he hastened to explain. Belinda
smiled a bit. \"No. I suspect not. That behavior in a child, or even in
a dog, might well have been a clue that someone had overpunished him in
the past. But cats are different. Cats are natural cynics.\" Once Waldo
had gone through his archaeological data on project pressure and put his
findings on OHP acetates, he set up a projector in the office and waited
until Webster and Belinda had made themselves comfortable. Then he began
to deliver his findings.

\"We took fourteen projects out of our database,\" he told them.
\"Remember, these are all projects completed by our staff here at
Aidrivoli over the last three or four years. We had already sized the
products they built and expressed the result in hnction points. Then, we
plotted the actual delivery time for each project, and derived a trend
line showing the normal calendar time it takes to deliver products of
any given size. The result looked like this,\" Waldo said. 14 Projects
and How Long They Took

Trend Line

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Size in Function Points

\"Next,\" Waldo continued, \"we used the trend line to determine the
normal expected delivery time for each of the fourteen projects. We have
now studied more than thirty projects, so you might wonder why we chose
these particular fourteen to show you. Well, they were the ones that had
left a good audit trail behind them. We could reconstruct, for example,
the entire scheduling history for each of them, including initial
published delivery date and each subsequent update. We used this to
compute what the average expected delivery time

was over the life of the project. We did that for each of the fourteen.
Here are a few of the results.\" He showed them the next slide.

\"You can probably see exactly where I\'m going now. We reasoned the
Norninal/Expected made a good metric of Pressure. You asked us to
investigate the effects of pressure, so we looked at the actual
performance of the fourteen projects as a hnction of their respective
values of Nominal/Expected.\" He went on to the next slide. \"This is
what we came up with.\" Delivery Time vs. Pressure

0

1

2

3

Pressure \[Nominal {Expected)

\"Wait a minute, it\'s practically flat,\" Mr. Tompkins exclaimed.
\"Right. More or less, there is no effect of pressure.\" \"This is
crazy,\" Belinda said. She walked to the projector and turned it ninety
degrees so that it cast its image on the white board rather than on the
blank wall. Then, she lined it up so Waldo\'s graph was almost precisely
overlaid on her own:

\"Two questions here,\" she went on. \"On the left-hand part of the
graph, why don\'t we get more of a productivity hit from reasonable
increases in pressure? And, over here on the right side, why don\'t
people continue to leave as the pressure is built up more and more?\" A
light knock at the door and Mrs. Beerzig showed in Gabriel Markov and
Aristotle Kenoros. Belinda addressed Kenoros directly: \"What do you
think, Aristotle? Why don\'t people leave when pressure is really
punishing and unrealistic? Oh, some people obviously do, but then it
looks like there is a core that stays on, no matter how bad it gets.
Why?\" \"Cynical,\" he said. \"Programmers are naturally cynical.\"

\"Like cats,\" Mr.Tompkins threw in. \"Sure, like cats. Look, you\'ve
been there yourself, Belinda. Somebody gives you an unrealistic date,
what\'s your response? \'Oh, well. Such is life.\' Then they make it
still more unrealistic: \'Ho hum. So what else is new?\' Am I right?\"
She shrugged agreeably, \"Maybe so. Programmers and cats,\" and then she
pointed to Waldo\'s graph. \"But what sense do you make of Zone I? I
would have thought we\'d get at least some effect from turning on a
moderate amount of pressure. Maybe twenty-five percent, or at the very
least fifieen percent. But Waldo\'s data shows that we\'re getting next
to nothing.\" \"Six percent at the best,\" Waldo told them. \"There is
some noise in the data, of course. So, you should think of it as six
percent plus or minus maybe three.\" \"Almost nothing. I wonder why.\"
\"I wonder why,\" Mr.T. repeated. A long silence. \"So, ask the
Oracle,\" Kenoros said. As soon as the Internet message had been sent,
Mr. T. composed a filter command to sound a beep at his workstation as
soon as any reply came in with the word \"oracle\" in its From line. He
looked at his watch. \"I don\'t imagine we\'ll have an answer before
tomorrow. Too bad. I\'m fascinated to know what he might suggest.\" He
hit Return to put the filter in place. There was an immediate beep.
\'\"Hello, what\'s this? Hey, he has already answered.\" \"Not just your
run-of-the-mill Oracle,\" Kenoros observed.

They gathered around the screen. The message was mostly header. In
fact, the guts of the Oracle\'s reply was only a single line: Date: 1
September 07:55:42 -0400 From: The Oracle \<oracle@lister.com\>
MIME-Version: 1.0 To: webster@morovia.com Subject: Re: Pressure and
Productivity On 1 September you wrote: \> Why does the effect of
pressure on programmers \> m a x out after only 6% productivity gain? My
answer:

PEOPLE UNDER PRESSURE DON\'T THINK FASTER. Best regards, The Oracle

They went back over to the sitting area near the windows and plunked
themselves down-Belinda, Webster, Aristotle, Gabriel, and Waldo. There
was a long silence. Finally, Aristotle said again, \"Not your
run-of-the-mill Oracle.\" Then another long pause. Webster broke the
silence: \"What do you call a guy who tells you something you should
have known a hundred years ago, but didn\'t .\" \"A genius,\" Belinda
offered. The others nodded. \"Our whole theory of pressure is kaput,\"
Gabriel said. \"Everybody\'s whole theory of pressure . . .\" \"Which
is,\" Belinda interrupted, \"the standard prevailing theory of
productivity improvement. We all talk a good game about the things that
might increase productivity. But then,

when we need it, what do we really do? We apply pressure. That is the
one-trick pony used by almost all managers.\" \"Management\'s one-trick
pony.\" Gabriel was smiling his wide, gold-toothed smile. \"No wonder we
managers are so well paid.\" Mr. T. was still struggling to digest the
meaning of the Oracle\'s message. \"Look, if people don\'t think any
faster under pressure-and who could deny it?-then the only effect
that\'s left is that people work longer hours. No wonder we don\'t see
larger productivity gains. Even fifteen percent would imply a continuing
overtime rate of six or seven hours a week, week in and week out, across
the whole team. That\'s an enormous amount of overtime. Probably too
much to be practical. And even that doesn\'t give us a huge hit. Waldo,
why are you shaking your head?\" \"Because we looked at the effects of
overtime. We thought we should factor overtime into our pressure metric,
but when we looked for the impact of overtime hours, we couldn\'t find
it at all.\" \"What?\" \"We did a very simple analysis. We just compared
all the projects in our database where there was overtime, paid or
unpaid, against those where there wasn\'t. We calculated production
rates in function points per person-month. The projects with no overtime
had a slightly higher production rate. Not much, only a few percentage
points.\" Gabriel stopped him. \"Wait a minute, Waldo. Surely you mean
the hourly production rates were the same, not the monthly production
rates. And since the overtime workers were putting in more of those
hours, all at the same value, their total production over the month
would be increased by the added number of hours. NO?\"

\"No. The people who worked 190 hours in a month did slightly more
total work than those who worked 200, and more still than those who did
210 or 220. I\'m sorry, I know these data are not what you were
expecting. But we checked and rechecked.\" \"C\'mon people,\" Aristotle
told them. \"This is not news. You all knew it in your guts. Extended
overtime is a productivity-reduction technique.\" They all thought about
that. \"I can believe it,\" Belinda said at last. \"We all know that
overtime has its negatives: burnout, lost energy, increased error rate .
. .\" \"Wasted time during the normal workday,\" Aristotle added. \"Why
that?\" \"Because people convince themselves it\'s okay to have lots of
meetings and to permit interruptions because they expect to make it up
in the evening hours.\" \"I suppose. If you told them that no overtime
hours were permitted, they\'d have to clean up their act.\" Sure.\"
\"So, add that to the list of negatives. What Waldo\'s numbers are
telling us is that the negatives more than offset the extra work people
do during overtime hours. As Aristotle said, this is something we\'ve
all considered at one time or another.\" \"So, what is a manager
supposed to do?\" Mr. Tompkins asked them, a slight tremor in his voice.
\"The other stuff,\" Belinda replied. \" \~ &hard e stuff: hiring,
motivation, team dynamics, keeping good people on board, working
inefficiencies out of the methods, meeting reduction, lightened
overhead, trimming down excess documentation.\" (6

Mr. Tompkins was still aghast. \"If overtime is really
counterproductive, you\'re telling me we ought to be sending people home
at night?\" \"We should. In fact, I do.\" \"Belinda? You? You actually
turn them out?\" \"I do. I never used to, but since my own episode of
burnout, I am reformed. I see people staying too late and I toss them
out. I tell them I\'m turning off the lights in ten minutes. And I do
it, too. No kidding. I\'ve begun to think that if someone had had the
good sense to send me home occasionally when I was putting in so many
extra hours, I might still be a working woman today.\" \"In case you
haven\'t noticed, Belinda,\" Gabriel told her, \"you are a working woman
again. You have been in at eight each day this week and stayed all
day.\" \"Aha,\" Mr. T. exclaimed. \"And it is now . . . five thirty! You
are working overtime, young lady. And I, caring manager that I am, am
giving you the homeward shove. Off you go.\" He jerked his finger toward
the door. \"Thank you, Webster. That\'s sweet. But I\'m having too much
h n to go now.\" \"Out,\" he said firmly. \"Too much h n is no excuse.
That\'s what they\'re all telling themselves, the ones that you boot out
at night.\" She laughed easily. \"So true,\" she said, standing and
gathering her notes. \"Oh well, so long everybody.\" \"Back to your
shopping cart,\" Webster added, maliciously. She stuck out her tongue at
him. \"No, I\'ve rather had it with my shopping cart. Think I\'ll go
back to the Residence and soak in a nice long bath.\" \"The rest of you
out, as well,\" Mr. T. told them. \"Home. Everybody goes home. Me, too.
In fact, I think I will pick up

my trunks and go down to the shore for a swim. Lights off in ten
minutes.\" He would, too. He would be gone in ten minutes. As soon as
the others had left, he picked up his pen and journal to make a few
quick notes. From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

The Effects of Pressure o

People under pressure don\'t think any faster.

o

Extended overtime is a productivityreduction tactic.

o

s h o r t b u r s t s o f pressure and even overtime may be a useful t a
c t i c a s t h e y focus people and increase t h e sense t h a t t h e
work is important, b u t extended pressure is always a mistake.

o

Perhaps managers make so much use of pressure because they don\'t know
what else t o do, or are daunted by how difficult t h e alternatives
are.

o

Terrible suspicion: The real reason for use of pressure and overtime may
be t o make everyone look better when the project fails.

PLANNING FORTHE SUMMERGAMES

a f i e r his breakfast, Seafood liked to go out onto the terrace and
&om there along the narrow catwalk around to the far side of the
building where Lahksa always left her own terrace doors open for him
when she was in town. Now, of course, her suite was closed up tight, as
it had been since early April when Belok first arrived on the scene.
Within a few moments, Seafood was back. He looked up accusingly at Mr.
Tompkins and gave a long complaining meow. \"1 know, I know. I miss her,
too. And I don\'t know when she\'ll be back.\" There was some news of
Lahksa that day, though very in&rect. When Mr. Tompkins arrived at the
office, he found a huge pile of documentation in black, loose-leaf
notebooks waiting for him. There was an accompanying note on the
engraved stationery of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The handwriting
was angular and almost, but not quite, illegible. The note said: \"I had
Hoolihan steal this from the States.

16

PLANNING FOR THE SUMMER

GAMES

With a head start like this, there will be no excuse for missing the
summer year 2000 deadline.\" And it was signed with a flourish,
\"Belok.\" Also waiting for him was Aristotle Kenoros. He had one of the
black notebooks open on his lap. H e looked up. ccSpecificationsfrom the
FAA NASPlan contracts,\" he told him. Tompkins groaned. \"Not the
American NASPlan specs. All those projects ended up in litigation.\"
\"Right. These are court-impounded documents. They\'ve got court seals
all over them.\" \"If Belok really wanted to help us, he might have
stolen the specs from the French system, or even the Spanish system. At
least those projects produced results. But these . . .\" \"The good
news: We\'ve got a hll set. I checked. There is a spec here for each and
every component. I suppose there is a possibility that projects that
went on to be a complete debacle still managed to produce decent
specifications along the way. There is a possibility of that.\" I
guess.\" \"About one in a million, but it\'s still a possibility.\"
\"Oh, well, I suppose even grossly imperfect specifications might be
better than nothing. I should think that even a competent list of
components would be of some use. I\'m counting on you to lend us a hand
on this Air Traffic Control project as well,Aristotle. I mean, later,
when they get into the design activity. By that time, you should be off
the hook with the others.\" \"Oh, sure. Glad to help. Very amusing work,
juggling airplanes in the air. A nice project for no deadline.\" \"But
of course there is a deadhne. A fixed deadline and a very aggressive
one.\" 66

\"Of course. I just thought that there might be, someplace on earth, a
project where the goal is quality rather than time. I guess not, though.
Guess I was wrong. You can see why I was thinking that, though. I mean,
an Air Traffic Control system, you might think that would be a natural.
You might think people would be saying, \'Hey, take your time, folks, no
hurry. Really, just get it right. Take whatever time is needed.\"\'
\"Fat chance.\" \"I guess I am a hopeless idealist.\" \"We have got an
excellent team for you to work with, however. I said the magic words
\'Air Traffic Control\' to Gabriel, and he came up with seven people who
had worked on the Spanish system. I took it as an omen and hired them
on. And they\'re really good.\" \"More good news. And now the bad news.
I have some bad news for you. Not fiom the ATC project, but &om one of
the others-You\'ve got trouble.\" \"What else is new?\" \"This is new
trouble. PMill-A. You\'ve got an angry manager.\" \"I have?\" \"Abusive.
Loud and abusive. Angry and abusive. People are starting to be afiaid of
him.\" PMi11-A was run by Osmun Gradish, a pleasant, softspoken, young
manager. It was hard to imagine him being abusive. \"I\'ll stop by and
talk to him in the afiernoon,\" Mr. Tompkins said. \"In the meantime,
give me a hand with these books, please, Aristotle. We\'ll drop them off
downstairs where the ATC team lives. I\'m determined to be entirely
optimistic about these specs. Think positively; we have to. If these
specs don\'t give us some advantage, then the summer of 2000 is going to
be a major fiasco.\"

Between the two of them, they were just barely able to carry all the
black notebooks. Mr. Tompkins began scooping them up and loadmg them
into Aristotle\'s outstretched arms, and then into his own until there
was only one notebook left. Mr. T. bent down and managed to slip the
last one under his arm. \"Why are we doing this?\" he wondered out loud
to Kenoros. \"Why are we taking on all this extra work for the ATC
system? We were overloaded before Belok ever mentioned this new
wrinkle.\" . Kenoros\'s voice came out muffled fiom behind the pile of
black notebooks. \"We take on too much,\" the voice said, \"because we
are terrified of too little.\" Osmun Gradish was still pleasant-seeming
and still softspoken. But there were some strain lines around the man\'s
mouth. At first, that was all that was evident. Tompkins invited himself
to sit in on the weekly staff meeting for the PMill-A project. Also
present was the PMill product manager, Melissa Alber, Gradish\'s boss.
After the meeting, Mr. T. took a coffee with Ms.Alber out on the patio
in fiont ofAidrivoli-1. \"So, what\'s up with PMill-A?\" \"Oh,Webster.
Bad stuff. Osmun is not responding well to the stress.\" Mr.T. shook his
head. \"I don\'t blame him. Our response to having the A-Teams
overstaffed and overpressured was to set up B- and C-Teams. Now, when
I\'m feeling down at all, I just stop by Notate-C or PShop-C or
Quickerstill-B or almost any of the others.\" \"Me, too.\" \"The A-Team
managers don\'t have that luxury. We\'re treating them like sacrificial
pawns, and it\'s kind of hard on the pawns.\"

\"It is.\" \"How bad is it? Tell me.\" \"He can be extremely cutting,\"
Melissa said. \"Sometimes he yells. His face turns red. He calls people
down in fiont of the others.\" \"Is there something else bothering him,
do you think? Something besides the pressure?\" \"He won\'t talk, but I
don\'t think so, Webster. You know what he told me? He told me that
Quirk-A is going to finish on time. He thinks he might be the only one
late. I think that\'s what\'s getting to him.\" \"Should I talk to
him?\" \"Maybe later. Let me work with him a bit more.\" \"As you
like.\" Oh, there are some transfer requests starting to come in. People
are asking to be switched off PMill-A. I don\'t know exactly how to . .
.\" \"Let me think about it a bit.\" \"You knowwebster, you say that the
A projects are sacrificial pawns. But we shouldn\'t think of them that
way. We should think of them as training opportunities. Even if the work
is frustrating and the deadlines hopeless, the team is learning to work
together. A healthy and well-jelled PMill ATeam would be a real asset
when the next big assignment comes along.\" \"I know. I\'m thinking of
the Air Traf£ic Control project. When that moves into implementation,
we\'re going to need fknctioning work groups to apply to it. Osmun\'s
team is not ideal-at least, their experience isn\'t the most germane-but
there will be plenty of work they can do. They could be a real asset, as
you say.\" (6

\"They will if they ever do jell as a team. I don\'t need to tell you
that groups of developers, when they don\'t feel appreciated, don\'t
tend to form into a particularly strong team. Right now, I wouldn\'t
hold out great hopes for PMill-A. . . .\" Belinda had been working for
the past few days with the Air Traffic Control project group. Now she
had them all focused on one of the recently pinched FAA specifications,
the one covering the Radio Governance System. They were still a long way
fiom sure about how elaborate the Morovian ATC system would be, but it
would clearly have to tie into radio contact with the planes, so the RGS
component, at the very least, was a requirement. Webster had taken just
three hours to read through the RGS spec before joining the group at
day\'s end. \"Hi, Boss.\" Belinda was looking particularly cheerful. He
noticed that the rest of the group was subdued. Even the team leader,
Gulliver Menendez, was not wearing his usual enthusiastic expression. In
fact, he seemed a bit sheepish. \"Well, here\'s the question of the day,
Webster: What do you think of the spec?\" Belinda was grinning. Mr. T.
found himself slightly on the defensive. The truth was, he hadn\'t
understood a word of what he\'d read. \"Well, I really only had a couple
of hours to . . .\" \"That\'s okay. Tell us your take after the first
couple of hours of reading.\" \"Well, that is to say, of course, that
basically, this spec is basically, how shall I say it?\" \"How indeed?\"
\"Of course, there is just no question that the system being specified
here is pretty complex. But having said that, you

know, the spec does seem to come to grips with the complexity, and I
just think that, I\'d have to say, that though I may need a few more
hours . . .\" \"In other words, you didn\'t understand squat. Am I
right?\" \"Uh, more or less. You see, I think this is the kind of
specification that one has to read pretty hard, and if you haven\'t done
that, well, of course, then you still haven\'t gotten to see its thread
or its inner logic. Is that pretty much what you guys have all
concluded?\" Gulliver nodded glumly. \"That was more or less what we had
concluded, the nine of us. Belinda, on the other hand, had an entirely
different take on it.\" \"Ah. And what is Belinda\'s take on it, if I
may ask?\" She was looking vastly amused. \"It\'s gibberish, Webster.
Front-to-back gibberish. All of every page is pure gibberish.\" \"Well,
I don\'t know that I would say that. After all, this spec was written by
some pretty high-powered people.\" \"Oh, yes. It was.\" \"And reviewed
and accepted by the FAA.\" \"Yup. The spec writers wrote gibberish, the
reviewers read gibberish, and the FAA accepted gibberish.\" He was
annoyed by her smugness. \"I don\'t see how you can possibly say that. I
mean, after all, this spec kicked off a project that went on to spend a
hundred million dollars or more in development.\" \"One hundred sixty
million dollars. I looked it up.\" \"Well, there you are. Nobody\'s
going to spend that much implementing a spec that nobody understands.\"
\"No? Well, let me ask a test question. You read the spec, for, let\'s
say, two hours.\" \"Three, actually.,\' \"So, you must have gotten
through it at least once.\"

\"At a very cursory level, yes. And, then I went back, stdl at a
cursory level, and breezed through it again.\" \"Okay. Tell me, is there
a keyboard connected to the system?\" \"Um.\" Mr.T. had that panicky
feeling you get in a college exam when you realize you haven\'t read a
key chapter of the text and all the questions are on that chapter. \"Um,
I didn\'t exactly notice that. Perhaps it was in one of the parts that I
read in a particularly cursory way.\" She turned to the others. \"You
guys have been working on this all day, right? Tell me, did anybody
notice if there is a keyboard connected to the system?\" They all
shrugged. \"Good question,\" Gulliver answered. \"So, we don\'t know
that,\" Mr.Tompkins conceded. \"That is an outstanding question. There
are always questions about system specifications. You haven\'t proved
the spec is totally incoherent, only that it is imperfect. We could
hardly expect perfection.\" \"Webster, think about what it is that I
asked you. We\'re looking at a multiprocessor hardware/software system
that has hundreds of configuration variables in its database. . . .\"
\"There, now. You see, we all got that out of the spec. There is both
hardware and software, and there is a databaseand it\'s &ll of
configuration data of some sort. So, we definitely got something &om the
spec. It\'s not total gibberish.\" \"But where do they come &om, those
configuration variables?\" \"Excuse me?\" \"How do they get there?\"
\"Well, I suppose they get there from operator input; in which case, we
would have to suppose there is an input device

at the console. Or, maybe they are loaded at initialization time along
with the software. Or, maybe they come from one of the upstream systems.
Or, maybe the s o h a r e actually constructs the configuration database
on the fly by probing the hardware to see how it\'s connected.\"
\"Right. Those are four possibilities. The system could be one of four
totally different systems, depending on which one of the four is
selected. But none of the four is selected. The spec simply doesn\'t
commit itself as to where the data comes from. Or, for that matter, as
to what configuration data specifically has to be included in the
database. While we\'re at it, it doesn\'t ever say explicitly what the
rules are for reconfiguration or whether the system can reconfigure on
the fly or how the radio frequencies are loaded or reassigned or how
messages are switched or whether there are multi-destination connections
or . . .\" \"Or anything,\" Gulliver nodded. \"She\'s right, Webster.
The spec doesn\'t specifj. anything. It\'s three-hundred pages of vague
implications.\" He knew he wanted to write something about the spec of
\"implications\" in his journal, but what? Now that he\'d spent another
hour on the document, he could see that Belinda was quite right. As a
specification, it was quite useless; the document simply refbsed to
commit itself on any subject. But why had it been written that way? Was
it such rocket science to write a system specification? And why had no
one seen through its emptiness, none of his people except Belinda, and
no one on the American FAA development project that had tried to
implement RGS? Even he had been infinitely willing to give it the
benefit of the doubt. Why was that? He\'d seen

16

PLANNING FOR THE SUMMER GAMES

other hopelessly vague specifications in his day, each one of them a
milestone on a project that subsequently failed. Why did they get
written that way, and why did they get accepted, and why did no one ever
see through them? It made a kind of mystery story: The Puzzle of
thevague Specification. O n these still-warm autumn evenings, he knew
that Belinda often swam laps at the Residence pool before supper. He
took a chance on finding her there. Sure enough, there she was, moving
smoothly through the water. Mr. Tompkins sat himself down on one of the
recliners and watched for a moment, admiring her skillfbl somersault
turns at each wall and all that boundless energy. As soon as she came
out, he would seek her counsel on the vague specification matter. While
waiting, he opened his journal to the first blank page and began to
write some comments about Osmun and the curious way he had begun to
emulate exactly the behavior that Belok had used to terrifjr him. From
Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

The Anary Manager o

Anger and contempt in management are contagious. When upper management i
s abusive, lower management mimics t h e same behavior (much like abused
children who go on t o become abusive parents).

o

Managerial contempt is supposed t o a c t as a goad t o get people t o
invest more in their performance. I t is t h e most frequent \"stick\"
of carrot-andstick management. B u t where is t h e

evidence t h a t c o n t e m p t has ever caused anyone t o perform
better? o

A manager\'s use of contempt t o goad workers is more a sign of t h e m
a n ager\'s inadequacy than of the workers\'.

What he still didn\'t know was why angry managers were angry. Why did
they choose to display that particular emotion? Belok, for example,
seemed monotonously hrious, but why? Another puzzle. Mr.Tompkins had set
out to write a journal of conclusions about how management works and
doesn\'t work, but now he was wondering if he shouldn\'t instead have
written a book of puzzles. There were certainly more of them. Soon
Belinda was out of the pool and beside him, toweling off. \"Hi, Boss.
What\'s up?\" \"You\'re dripping on my leg.\" \"Sorry.\" c\< I m
puzzling over puzzles, since you ask. Want to puzzle with me for a
while?\" \"Sure.\" Belinda spread out her towel on the recliner beside
his and draped herself over it. \"What\'s the puzzle of the day?\'\' He
laughed, somewhat bitterly. \"Would that there were only one. Let\'s
take on the matter of the vague specification, just for starters. I have
two questions: Why was the spec written that way? and,Why didn\'t anyone
notice? Anyone but you, that is? Why were the rest of us determined to
believe that it did speciG a system, and that if we didn\'t understand
it, it was our problem, not its?\" \"That\'s a tough one. Let me peel
off a slightly easier piece of it, though, one that I think I can
answer: Why didn\'t any of 7

16

.PA

L NNING FOR THE SUMMER

GAMES

our highly competent team blow the whistle and say, \'This spec sucks\'?
If the spec had been a little less awfbl, we\'d say they were just
determined to make up for its inadequacies by trying harder. That would
be a good, professional attitude. But the RGS specification is an
abomination. In a course on specification writing, it would get an
immediate E Why &dn\'t they tell us that?\" \"Okay, why?\" \"If any one
of them were teaching the specification course, he or she would know
enough to assign the E But they didn\'t feel themselves to be in a
judging position. Rather, they were in a competing position.\"
\"Competing with the spec?\" \"Competing with each other. I have a
theory, Webster, that a l l of us have a few secret inner doubts about
our mental capacities. I speculate that we are an entire race of
creatures that have this strange characteristic: Each of us secretly
believes he or she is of below-average intelligence compared to the
others, and has to make up for it by trying harder. As we read through a
horrible morass of complexity like the RGS spec, our secret doubt makes
us believe that all the others who are reading it are understanding what
they read. Now, the boss comes along and asks, \'How goes the spec
reading? Are you getting along okay?\' Panic. What do you say? You
cover. You say,\'Oh, fine, Boss. I mean, sure, it\'s complicated, of
course, but given a bit of time . . .\' And all the others are doing the
same thing.\" \"So, nobody blows the whistle.\" \"I learned this a long
time ago,KfJebster. Nobody will ever tell you that the spec is lousy.
People may grumble that the writing isn\'t as clear as it could be, but
they won\'t tell you what you really need to know: That it isn\'t a
specification at

all; it simply doesn\'t do any of the things that a specification needs
to do. It doesn\'t specifjr\" \"So, how did you see through it? Don\'t
you have inner doubts?\" \"You\'re asking this of a woman who lives
under a palm tree? Get serious. Sure I have inner doubts, as much as
anyone else. But I\'ve been burned on this one before. I know some
specifications are utter rot, and I have schooled myself to see through
them. I have a few mechanical rules, for example.\" \"Please share. I\'d
love to know your rules.\" \"Well, I\'ll give you one of them-in the
form of a definition: A specification is a statement of how a system-a
set of planned responses-will react to events in the world immediately
outside its borders. There are two parts to every spec: first, a set of
policies showing how the system\'s responses depend on events; and
second, a set of inputs and outputs by which the events and responses
are moved across the system boundary. No matter how complex the system
is, the second of these parts is pretty simple: All of the inputs and
outputs are listable data and control flows. They can each be named or
numbered. They can be sized-by the number of data elements in a flow,
for example. And they can be counted.\" \"You\'re saying that if the
system is really complicated, all the complexity is in the policy.\"
\"It is. The policy governing how inputs get transformed into outputs
can be arbitrarily complex. But inputs and outputs are just that: inputs
and outputs. You may never understand the transformations, but if a spec
is worth anything at all, it has to tell you exactly what the boundary
characteristic is. If it doesn\'t have at least a count of inputs and
outputs, the spec gets an E It isn\'t a spec at all.\"

16

PLANNING FOR THE SUMMER GAMES

\"So, every spec has to have, at the very least, a complete census of
inputs and outputs, maybe give each one a name and show what its
composition is.\" \"At least. The spec may still not get an A, but at
least it\'s not a nonstarter like the RGS spec was.\" He pondered that.
\"Well, maybe that explains what happened on the RGS project. There was
a really extraordinarily complicated transformation policy, and the
specification writers got so bogged down trying to describe it that they
just forgot to do the relatively easy part. In that case, we could
conclude that the system was so complex that maybe it just couldn\'t be
specified. And that\'s the reason the spec was a failure.\" \"I don\'t
think so. There was something else going on. I\'ll give you my theory on
that as well. But first, I point out that no matter how complex the
policy is, you can specie most of the system with nothing more than the
census of inputs and outputs. I want you to imagine an alternate RGS
specification. Imagine one of merely twenty pages. It has a complete and
elaborate census of inputs and outputs, each one named and defined down
to the data-element level. Where the inputs and outputs have control
significance, there may be a description of the signals, maybe even
including voltage levels, pulse durations, whatever it takes. That\'s
all part of your census. Let\'s say the census lists twenty kinds of
input and thirty kinds of output. Now, for the transformation section,
we have a simple one-sentence statement. It says, \'The twenty inputs
and thirty outputs are related in the sorts of ways that you might
expect these kinds of inputs and outputs to be related.\' How\'s that
for a spec?\" \"Belinda, that\'s a horrible spec! That\'s about as
ambiguous as it could be.\"

\"It is in its description of the policy for transformation. But it\'s
clear and complete in its description of inputs and outputs. In other
words, the easy part is done to perfection, and only the hard part is
lousy.\" \"So, what\'s your point?\" \"My point is that such a spec, for
all its imperfection, would have allowed the RGS project to proceed. It
might have kept it out of litigation. The developers would have seen
where the holes were. They would have written down all their assumptions
about what they assumed the transformation policy would have to be. And
they would have taken these back to the controllers and the
administrators and gotten verification or correction. The twenty-page
spec I\'ve just described to you would have been a truly awful spec, but
it would have been infinitely better than the spec the FAA produced.\"
He didn\'t doubt that. But now that she\'d said that, it opened more new
questions than it answered. \"Why do you suppose they wrote the spec
that way? Why did they make it so ambiguous?\" She laughed. \"I finally
know the answer to that. It wasn\'t easy to understand at first, but
once I caught on to the general rule, the specific instances of it have
always been easy to spot.\" \"The \'general rule\' is . . . ?\"
\"Ambiguity implies unresolved conflict.\" \"Conflict?\" \"Conflict.
Systems are negotiated between interested parties: owners, users,
stakeholders, builders, operators, adrninistrators. On a complex system
like RGS, there may be dozens of different kinds of interested parties.
Sometimes, the parties don\'t agree. They\'re in conflict. Example:
Imagine one party to the RGS negotiation that wants initialization
variables to

be controlled directly by the system operator, while another party
wants them to be controlled centrally.\" \"Ah. They\'re in conflict. And
if the conflict is unresolvable . . . ?\" \"The spec has to be
ambiguous. It can\'t commit itself on whether there is a keyboard to
facilitate direct entry by the operator, for example. It can\'t state
exactly what the configuration variables are. Each unambiguous statement
on the subject would be a red flag to one or more of the parties,
because it can only be unambiguous by choosing among their conflicting
needs to own the data.\" \"The spec writers could write an unambiguous
spec, but . . .\" \"They would have to commit themselves, to come down
on one side or the other of the conflict, and then they would have been
eaten alive by the other side.\" \"How depressing. Instead of resolving
the conflict, they paper it over with ambiguity.\" \"It happens all the
time. Now when I come across anything unclear in a specification, I go
nosing around for conflict. I always find it. I\'ve become convinced
that it\'s pretty trivial to make an unambiguous statement of anything.
When we fail to do it, it\'s not our expression skills that need to be
fixed, but our conflict-resolution skills.\" Mr. T. stared off toward
the hills and the sky just above them where a few dim stars were
starting to appear. He let his thoughts take him where they would. After
a while Belinda asked, \"How about some dinner, Boss?\" \"You go on in,
Belinda. Get changed. I\'ll meet you in the dining room.\" She gathered
her things and headed into the Residence. Mr-Tompkinspicked up his
journal and began to write again.

Ambiguous 5\~ecification o

Ambiguity in a specification is a sign of unresolved conflict among the
various system stakeholders.

o

A specification t h a t doesn\'t contain a complete census of inputs and
o u t puts is a nonstarter; it simply doesn\'t begin t o specify.

o

Nobody will tell you if a specification is lousy. People are inclined t
o blame themselves rather than it.

\"W

e don\'t know jack about conflict resolution,\" Mr. Tompkins was telling
the assembled management dream team. \"And here, I\'m not just talking
about the people in this room, but about our whole industry. We have
skills of system design, system implementation, documentation, testing,
quality assurance, and all that. But we have no conflict-resolution
skills.\" \"It must be because there is no conflict in our business,\"
Aristotle Kenoros offered, dryly. \"Sure,\" Belinda laughed. \"None at
all. It\'s only everywhere you look. Between us and Belok, between us
and the Institute, between us and at least some of the teams, between
the teams, within the teams. And that\'s just here at Aidrivoli, on this
one small campus. Webster and I have been speculating that the FAA
projects, the ones our Air Traffic Control specifications were taken
from, were rife with conflict at all levels.\" \<\< Conflict is
everywhere in our business,\" Mr. Tompkins went on. \"You can\'t install
a system of any magnitude at all without encountering some serious
contlict. There are always

many parties to the work, and thus many conflicted interests. Conflict
is everywhere in our business, but our command of the subject of
conflict is virtually nil.\" \"I, of course, know something about armed
conflict,\" Gabriel observed. \"Well, that\'s a bit different, Gabriel.
Besides, you only know about that from your past life, not from being a
software development manager.\" \"True enough,\" the ex-General agreed
amiably. Mr. Tompkins made his pitch, \"What I want to suggest is that
we set out to become experts on conflict resolution. At the very least,
we need to find a good book on the subject, or a seminar, or a
consultant to guide us. Who is the international expert on conflict
resolution in our field?\" A long pause followed as they considered the
question. Finally, Gabriel spoke up. \"Webster, my friend. I don\'t know
who the international expert is, but how about a very local expert? How
about a man who is a conflict magician? I know such a man. He is a
former kindergarten teacher.\" \"Now, that is where some serious
conflict resolution skills might come from,\" Belinda observed. Gabriel
was nodding enthusiastically. \"In Morovia, those heroic souls who teach
in kindergarten are called \'Maestro.\' The man I would propose to you
is Maestro Diyeniar. He is a programmer on my staff. When you add him to
a team, problems tend to go away. He has never been very highly esteemed
by his management, except myself, since nobody understands what he does.
He may not understand it himself. His role seems to be catalytic. It
took me a long time to understand what a great asset the man is.\" \"Can
he teach us conflict resolution, Gabriel?\"

The ex-General looked a bit dubious. \"I don\'t think so, Belinda. I
know he can do conflict resolution, but I doubt he can tell us exactly
what he does. Like most people with a natural skill, what he does is not
very apparent, even to him. But still, he can be invaluable. Would you
have use of such a person,Webster? What would you do with him?\" \"A
catalytic personality,\" Mr.Tomphns mused. \"If you can spare him,
Gabriel, I will plunk him down in the PMill-A project and keep my
fingers crossed. Maybe he can make some of that very unhappy team\'s
problems go away.\" \"Done. I will arrange it later this morning.\"
Mr.Tompkins made a note on his desk pad. \"We still need someone to
guide us, though. Think, people, who is the expert? Who is the Guru of
Conflict Resolution in our field?\" He looked around the room to
Aristotle, Belinda, and Gabriel. After a long moment,Aristotle spoke up.
\"There is a guy.\" \"Not the Oracle again?\" \"No, another guy. I
forget his name. But he is the expert on conflict resolution for systems
projects. He also does some metrics. He is the inventor of the
\'Everybody Wins\' circular methodology.\" \"Of course!\" Belinda
exclaimed. \"He\'s our man.\" \"And who would that be?\"Mr. Tompkins
prodded her. \"Dr. Larry Boheme.\" That very evening, Mr.Tompkins flew
to London to catch the last day of Larry Boheme\'s two-day tutorial on
the \"Everybody Wins\" circular methodology. A tall, soft-spoken, and
somewhat shy man, Dr. Boheme seemed genuinely pleased when Mr.T. invited
him out after the seminar for a beer in a

nearby pub. They found themselves a table away from the worst of the
crowd, but still had to lean their heads close together to hear and be
heard over the din. \"Now, as I understand what you\'ve said, Dr. Boheme
. . .\" \"Larry. Please.\" Larry-thank you-now, as I understand what
you\'ve been saying, we need to acknowledge conflict and give it some
respect.\'\' \"Yes. The alternative is to declare conflict unacceptable.
That\'s what we do in most organizations. I\'m sure you\'ve come across
that yourself, Webster. Of course, that doesn\'t make contlict
impossible, doesn\'t make it go away.\" \"It only drives the conflict
underground.\" \"Exactly. We\'re far better off to acknowledge it up
front, and to take the onus away fiom conflict.\" \"I\'m having trouble
with that. Part of me, at least, wants to believe that there is
something reprehensible about conflict in the organization. Since we all
work for the same organization, there should be no conflict.\" \"Yes, I
know that line. Conflict is viewed as a kind of unprofessional
behavior.\" \"That\'s it. That\'s just what I\'m feeling. I think that
is part of my upbringing as a corporate man.\" \"And you\'re certainly
not the only one. When conflict arises, we tend to see it as a breakdown
of corporate discipline. We\'d like to draw lines up &om the two people
who have the conflict and find the first person above them on the org
chart where the lines intersect. Then, we think, \'If only that manager
would shake some sense into these two. . . .\"\' \"Well? Why isn\'t that
the answer?\" \"It would be if the entire organization had a single
goal, and that goal was everybody\'s individual goal as well. But 6\'

that\'s just not the case. Organizations are complex. They exist to
serve a diversity of goals. The way an organization is set up, the goals
are distributed differently among people. So, your goal may be to bring
a project home by a given date, while mine is to meet a third-quarter
sales quota. These two may be part of some larger goal, but we two
probably aren\'t explicitly aware of it.\" \"Each one only aware,
really, of his own designated goal.\" \"Just so.\" Mr. Tompkins offered
a second possibility: \"It might happen, I suppose, that our two goals
are themselves in conflict. Consider the example you just gave: Suppose
my project completion requires you to hold off implementing some new
promotion till the quarter is over.\" Dr. Boheme was nodding
energetically. \"There you have it. In that case, our goals are in
conflict, or at least in partial conflict. So, of course, you and I are
in conflict. The key thing here is to understand that neither of us has
acted unprofessionally. There is real conflict between us, and that
conflict deserves respect. If we drive it underground, paper it over
with corporate-speak about teamwork and professionalism, then we never
get on with the difficult but doable task of conflict resolution.\" \"A
\'doable task,\' you say.\" Mr. Tompkins looked away, into the interior
of the pub. There was a crowd of drinkers there, jostling around a dart
board, but he barely saw them; he was thinking of the conflicts in his
own life. Was it a doable task to resolve conflict with Belok, for
example? \"That\'s not to say we\'ll always succeed,\" Dr. Boheme went
on. \"Nobody\'s claiming this is easy. But at least we can learn to
avoid some of the approaches that almost guarantee we will fail.
Declaring conflict to be unprofessional and therefore not

allowed to exist is the most obvious of these. If we replace these
hopeless losers with techniques that have at least a chance of
succeeding . . .\" \"I wonder.\" \"Webster, you\'re thinking of the most
intractable cases of conflict now, aren\'t you?\" I am.\" \"Well, just
to get us off on the right foot, pick another conflict to concentrate
on. Conflict is everywhere in our business. Pick an easier one. We\'ll
begin with that.\" \"Fair enough.\" He had no trouble coming up with
several good candidates. \"Could we agree that the conflict you are
thinking of is respectable? That all parties are acting professionally
and that any conflict that arises between them is okay? It may have to
be resolved for the organization\'s best interests, but it is not in any
way reprehensible?\" \"Okay, I guess. I\'m not used to thinking of it
that way, but now that you put it in those terms, I can see the sense of
it.\" \"Good. Now every time you come face to face with a conflict, I
want you to school yourself to repeat the following little mantra:
\'Negotiation is hard; mediation is easy.\'\" \"What does that mean?\"
cc Negotiation among interested parties is most often a zero-sum game,\"
Dr. Boheme said. \"If you and I are dickering over the price of a
real-estate property, for example, you can see that anything I gain is
offset by your loss.\" \"If I\'m the seller, then giving you a discount
comes right out of my proceeds.\" \"Exactly. Negotiation is difficult.
Some people are better at it than others, but we can\'t realistically
expect everyone to 66

master the skills of negotiation. Mediation, on the other hand, is a
much simpler matter.\" \"Mediation implies there is a disinterested
third party helping us reach agreement?\" \"Yes. When the confhcting
parties accept mediation, the entire tone of the interaction is changed.
Now, following a few simple rules and procedures and with a bit of luck,
the mediator has a good chance of making meaningfbl agreement happen.
The parties come to understand and respect each other\'s needs, they
brainstorm to find options they hadn\'t considered before, they bargain
a bit, and they trust a bit. This is a formula that at least has a
chance.\" \"But how do we get them started? How do we get the warring
parties ever to agree to mediation?\" Dr. Boheme tapped a finger on the
table in emphasis. \"Not at the moment of conact; that is the key. We
need to do it before the conflict is hlly formed. That is the essence of
\'Everybody Wins.\' We make a formal declaration before the effort even
begins that everybody\'s \'win conditions\' will be respected. We put
into place procedures to elicit win conditions at all levels. We agree
before any conflict becomes evident that, when it arises, as it
certainly will, we will move automatically into mediation mode. We set
up a system with trained mediators ready to roll. And, we have a fairly
mechanical way to spot the conflicts.\" That\'s when my win conditions
and yours, for example, are mutually exclusive.\" \"Yes. Or, partly so.
I stress the \'partly\' here, because it is essential to realize that
people in conflict may have win conditions that are ninety-five percent
compatible. If they fail to note this, they will never understand how
compromise can be in both their interests. It is the mediator\'s job to
make sure 6 \'

both parties have a fbll understanding of the extent of their common
interest.\" \"I can certainly see that negotiation is hard, as your
mantra claims. But I think I\'d have to be a mediator a few times before
I\'m ready to believe that mediation is easy.\" \"It\'s not trivial, of
course.\" \"I wouldn\'t even know how to begin. What would I say, for
example, if I were the mediator between two warring parties?\"Mr.
Tompkins conjured up two imaginary people sitting with them at their
little pub table, \"Warring parties, locked in combat over some problem.
How would I begin to mediate between these two opposite sides?\"
\"You\'d begin by helping them to see that they weren\'t exactly on
opposite sides at all. You\'d point out to them, \'You two are on the
same side; it is the problem that is on the other side.\"\' Mr. Tompkins
caught the last British Air flight tovarsjop &om Gatwick that night. He
wasn\'t quite ready to swallow Dr. Boheme\'s prescription whole, but at
least he could now see a few things he had to try: First, he needed to
acknowledge the inherent respectability of conflict in his organization
so as not to let it be driven underground. And second, he would have to
set up ways for conflict to be mediated. With such a beginning, the
confhcts that tended to arise at Aidrivoli &om this point on would have
a chance to be sensibly resolved. He still didn\'t have the foggiest
notion of what any of this implied about his own conflict with Belok.
That conflict would have to be dealt with somehow, though. Unresolved
conflict could be the death knell to any project. During coffee breaks
at the London tutorial, he had

picked up some scuttlebutt about the FAA NASPlan projects. The rumors
confirmed, just as Belinda had speculated, that there had been serious
conflict between the central authority in Washington and the regions,
and that this conflict-never resolved and never even acknowledged-had
led the projects to certain disaster. Suppressing a yawn, he pulled his
journal from his carryon bag and opened it on the tray table before him.
From Mr. Tompkins7Journal:

Conflict o

Whenever there are multiple parties t o a development effort, there are
bound t o be conflicting interests.

o

The business o f building and installing systems is particularly
conflict-prone.

o

M o s t system development organizat i o n s have poor conflict-
resolution skills.

o

Conflict deserves respect. Conflict is n o t a sign o f unprofessional
behavior.

o

Declare up f r o n t t h a t everybody\'s win conditions will be
respected. Make sure t h a t win conditions are elicited a t all levels.

o

Negotiation is hard; mediation is easy.

o

Arrange up front t h a t when win conditions are mutually exclusive or
partly

so, the parties will be expected t o move into mediation t o resolve
conflict. o

Remember: We are both on the same side; it is t h e problem t h a t \' s
on t h e other side.

M e s t r o Diyeniar had been on the PMill-A project for a little more
than a month. Reports were mixed. Early on, his manager, Osmun Gradish,
had confided in Tompkins that Diyeniar was \"not an asset,\" and that,
although his work was impeccable, \"the fellow spends most of his time
chatting people up. I never met anybody with so much to say\'\' It was
obvious that Gradish would have liked to contribute his newest staff
member back to ex-General Markov\'s personnel pool, where he had come
from, but Mr.Tompkins encouraged him to delay any decision on Diyeniar
for a few months more. Melissa Alber was of quite the opposite opinion
on the Maestro: \"He is the most extraordinary man, Webster. He talks
your ear off, but it\'s rather wonderful.\" She shook her head in
admiration. \"I\'m still wondering exactly how he makes you feel so
good.\" \"I\'d heard he talks a lot, but does he talk about the work?\"
\"In a way, he does. But not about the technology of the work. Mostly he
is a storyteller. He tells stories about people-people he met a long
time ago, in school or in the

Army or on other projects. The stories are delicious. But, of course,
they usually have some relevance to what the project is up to. They give
you insight.\" If Gabriel was right, the particular magic that Diyeniar
did was helpfbl to projects. Maybe the stories were his way of conveying
useM insight. \"You think he may be doing this on purpose? trying to
give just the right insight by telling just the right story?\" Melissa
shook her head. \"I don\'t for a moment think that. The man is a
natural-born storyteller. The reason that his stories tend to be germane
at all is that he naturally connects what is happening in the present to
stories from the past. The connection is always seamless. But it\'s not
pointed. For Diyeniar, it\'s just good storytelling, pure and simple.\"
\"I must meet him. I can see that.\" \"Allow a few hours. He is not a
fellow to be dealt with in twenty minutes, no matter how simple the
subject. It seems like anything you say or do reminds hlm of a story. Or
a song. Sometimes both.\" \"I\'ll allow a bit of time.\" \"He is at his
best over lunch. Lunch with Diyeniar is a movable feast. It goes on
forever. You\'ll have to move quickly to get him to yourself. I can tell
you that the young people on his project have quite adopted him. They
have had to move the tables together in the cafeteria to make room for
all the people who like to sit with him.\" \"If he ties up the whole
project for two-hour lunches, then I wonder if he really can be doing
any good for our schedule.\" \"Oh, I wouldn\'t worry about that. Our
people are working too much anyway. They\'re all putting in tons of
overtime on what we all know is a hopeless cause.\"

\"That\'s true enough, I guess.\" \"At least we\'re not hemorrhaging
people any more. The requests to transfer have gone to zero.\" \"That\'s
an interesting trade-off. If we think of lunch with Diyeniar as a full
hour lost to the project, beyond what a normal lunch would take, but we
save turnover, is that a positive result?\" \"We don\'t need your
simulator to tell us that,\" Melissa observed. She affected a counting
gesture, moving successively along the fingers of her right hand. \"If
it takes each new person three months or more to come up to speed,
that\'s the equivalent of six hundred lunches with Diyeniar. The
withdrawn transfer requests alone have offset more than that.\" Mr.
Tompkins nodded in agreement. \"But there is something else going on
here,Webster. He is building a culture for the project. He is a catalyst
for a kind of team phenomenon that I haven\'t seen before. I mentioned
that he tells stories. But he listens to stories as well. And,
sometimes, he retells them. When you tell Maestro Diyeniar a story, you
are entering it into a kind of collection. He is the oral history of our
project. He is the keeper of our lore.\" As Mrs. Beerzig was away from
her desk, Mr.Tompkins picked up his own phone when it rang. \"Tompkins,
I want to see the screws applied to these projects. This is not an
option. I\'m not going to be \'Mister Nice Guy\' even one more day.
You\'ve already used up your honeymoon with me.\" \"Oh, Allair, it\'s
you, isn\'t it? How nice to hear from you.\" \"Damn right, it\'s me,
Tompkins. Apply the screws. Do it now. It\'s time to start our sprint
for the finish.\"

Mr. Tompkins glanced at the countdown display, which now, on this early
November day, read:

ONLY

DAYS TILL D-DAY!

Two hundred and eleven calendar days: He knew precisely what that
corresponded to in workdays. \"We still have one hundred fify-one
workdays till June first,AUair. Isn\'t that a bit early to \'start our
sprint,\' as you put it?\" \"We should have started it on day one, as
far as I\'m concerned. Only I was trying to be a kinder, gentler me.
Well, no more. And, by the way, there are two hundred eleven workdays
between now and June first, not one fie-one.\" \"Ah. We\'re switching to
a seven-day week, I gather.\" \"You bet we are. Put that out in a memo.
I expect to see a big bump in hours applied, starting this week.\" That
was the easy part, of course. AU along, Mrs. Beerzig had been doctoring
up the numbers each week before they went out to Belok. She would just
doctor them a bit differently &om now on. And, he himself would write a
mandatory-seven-day-week memo and send it off to Belok and no one else.
Oh, what a tangled web we weave. . . . \"Now, how is the schedule
going,Tompkins?\" \"On target for June first. With or without the
overtime.\" Oops, that was a mistake. \"Aha. That\'s it. I\'m changing
the delivery date. I\'m pushing it ahead to May first.\" Mr.Tompkins
repressed a sigh. Then, he said what he had to say, as though it were a
line in a play. \"Now, that will be a struggle. I don\'t know,AUair. I
don\'t think we can make May first. We might, but I suspect not.\"
\"Then, that is definitely the date.\"

\"It\'s going to be tough. I might say impossible, or almost
impossible.\" There was a click on the other end. Impossible or alrnost
impossible, of course, was what Belok wanted to hear. That was the way
the man set his dates. Mr. Tompkins allowed himself only the time for
one tiny, slightly bitter reflection: So much bother could have been
avoided if only I had convinced him fiom the beginning that the original
date we were striving for was already impossible. His first lunch with
Diyeniar did indeed take two hours. The Maestro was a tall, somewhat
gangly man with a long, finebridged nose. He appeared to be about sixty
years old, but his hair, what there was of it, was still quite black. It
fell in long plaits onto his shoulders &om around a bald pate.
Diyeniar\'s eyes were electric. They opened their sandwiches on a wooden
picnic table in the glade below Aidrivoli-1. \"Well, Maestro. I am
delighted you could make the time for me.\" Diyeniar shook his head.
\"This \'Maestro\' business, it makes me laugh. What exactly is it that
Diyeniar is a maestro of? The Maestro of C Programming, perhaps? O r a
maestro debugger? More likely, I am Maestro of None.\" \"Excuse me?\"
\"Jack of all trades, but maestro of none. Since you kindly offered me
your first name, Webster, I return the favor: Kayo.\" \"Kayo, then.
Anyway, I\'m glad we could have this time together, Kayo. I\'ve been
hearing good things about you.\" A big smile. \"That reminds me of a
story. . . .\" What followed was a long ramble about Kayo\'s grandfather
who had owned a hotel in the mountains near Markst.

By the time the story was done, Mr.Tompkins had finished his sandwich
and his companion hadn\'t even had one bite. There was only one obvious
way to give the man a chance to eat: \"Well, since we\'re talking about
grandfathers,\" Mr. Tompkins began,\"there is rather a hnny story about
mine . . .\" Kayo picked up his sandwich. At the end of two hours, it
wasn\'t obvious what had happened over lunch. There had been some lovely
tales exchanged, and that was certainly pleasant. And, as Melissa had
foreseen, he felt good. Was that it, though? Was that Diyeniar\'s magic?
On the way back to Aidrivoli-1, Mr. Tompkins raised the subject of
conflict, something that was on his mind much of the time these days.
\"Oh, yes,\" Kayo nodded. \"There is always a conflict here or there:
Two people who get their backs up over some subject where they are
mostly in agreement, but all they can see is what they don\'t agree
upon.\" \"And what should we do about such a thing?\" \"What does a
mother do with a child who has skinned his knee? A kiss to make it
better, and then she diverts the child\'s attention away from what hurts
to something that doesn\'t hurt at all. Before he knows it, the hurt
really is gone and forgotten.\" \"She diverts his attention by telling
him a story, for example?\" \"Maybe that. O r something else. But don\'t
forget the kiss, a mother\'s special kiss, applied directly to the spot
that hurts.\" \"What is the equivalent of that kiss in our business, do
you suppose?\"

\"That is the question. It should be some kind of small ceremony. In
general, I have no idea what kind of ceremony it should be. But, in the
specific, it is ofien so obvious.\" Ceremony, of course, is what the
initiation of mediation would be. \"I do have an idea, Kayo, that I\'d
like to try out.\" He gave a shortened version of Dr. Boheme\'s use of
mediation to resolve conflict. Kayo was nodding yes. \"They teach
mediation now in the schools, you know. Not in the kindergarten, but in
the middle grades. They teach kids to be mediators for disputes that
arise between their classmates. I have seen the student book for this
course. The course takes up only two hours of classroom time. You
understand, in two hours with children that age, you are only reaching
them about ten minutes. So, the entire course on mediation is ten
minutes of material. And the amazing thing is that the children then go
out into the playground and successfdly resolve disputes.\"
\"Negotiation is hard but mediation is easy,\" Tompkins prompted. \"I
guess,\" the Maestro said. \"Well, I like your idea that the first steps
toward mediation might be the ceremony we\'re looking for, the mother\'s
special kiss.\" \"Look around, Kayo, and let me know when you see a
conflict developing. I\'d like to try this idea out.\" Maestro Diyeniar
soon spotted a conflict on the Quirk BTeam. The manager, Loren Apfels,
and his chief designer, Nonvood Bolix, had had a falling out, and now,
interaction between them was increasingly painful. Mr. Tompkins arranged
to have the two show up together in his office for the first attempt at
applying the mediation \"ceremony.\" He

invited Maestro Diyeniar to attend. The three arrived together and were
ushered in by Mrs. Beerzig. \"Now look,\" Mr. Tompkins told Apfels and
Bolix, \"you two have gotten off on the wrong foot with each other. I
think we should acknowledge that and not try to cover it up.\" He looked
at them for agreement. At least they didn\'t disagree. They stared back
at him silently, waiting to see what would come next. \"Conflict is not
reprehensible, not in this organization,\" Mr. Tompkins told them.
\"It\'s ofien perfectly reasonable. I don\'t think there is anything
here for either of you to be ashamed of. But conflict can ofien get in
the way, and that\'s why we do need to address it.\" He paused,
dramatically, and then dropped his trump card: \"We all need to
understand that the two of you are not on opposite sides, really. You
are both on the same side. It is the problem that is on the other
side.\" This had seemed like a powerful formulation when Dr. Boheme
first presented it, but now it fell perfectly flat. Apfels and Bolix
just stared at him, not even nodding. He looked to Kayo for some help,
but Kayo only shrugged. He was on his own. Mr. Tompkins plowed on. \"You
two have been trying to negotiate your differences. But negotiation is
hard. Mediation, on the other hand, is pretty easy. So, here\'s what
we\'re going to do. I\'m going to be the mediator. We\'ll apply a few
basic conflict resolution techniques, and then I\'m sure we\'ll reach a
workable agreement for you two to interact more harmoniously in the
future. Now, what seems to be the problem here?\" Bolix looked over
uneasily at Apfels. \"Well, since you ask, I don\'t trust Loren. I
don\'t now, I never did, and I never will.\"

\"Ditto,\" said Apfels. A protracted silence as Tompkins considered
what to do or say next. He came up with nothing. \"Um, Kayo?\" Kayo
shook his head sadly. \"So much for the mother\'s kiss.\" He turned to
Apfels and Bolix. \"My &iends,Loren and Nonvood, I wish you could each
see in the other what I see: good qualities, including great integrity.
I know you both, and I know that about both of you, . . . but apparently
you don\'t know that about each other. You have made that very clear. I
believe you have now put the ball in Webster\'s court to do something
beyond just mediation. He\'ll figure out something, I\'m sure. For now,
why don\'t you leave us to work out a solution? You can trust us to make
some change that will be acceptable to you both and will relieve the
tension.\" Bolix and Apfels stood up and exited. As soon as the door was
closed behind them, Mr. Tompkins looked over at the Maestro. \"What did
I do wrong?\" Diyeniar shook his head sadly. \"Only everything. I
brought you the book &om the schools,Webster,the guide for twelve- to
fourteen-year-old mediators. I hoped you might have lefi a bit of time
for us to go over it, maybe to practice a bit before our two friends
showed up.\" Kayo opened the slender paperback book to one of its middle
pages and passed it over. Mr. T. looked down at the selected page. It
was headed, The Five Steps of Mediation. The first step read: ONE- Get
consent. Ask both people if they will allow you to mediate for them.

\"Oh,\" Mr. Tompkins said. \"Consent. I didn\'t do that. That was
perhaps an error.\" Kayo rolled his eyes.

Mr.Tompkins put his hand to his forehead. \"I should have done that. I
should have asked their consent.\" \"The asking and giving of consent
for mediation was the mother\'s kiss we were looking for. You skipped
the ceremony entirely and got directly on with the rest.\" \"Mrnm.\" Mr.
Tompkins read through the subsequent four steps. They were obvious
enough, now that he\'d seen them in print, but the truth was that he\'d
had no idea of how to proceed, and he probably would have botched up
steps two through five as much as he had step one. He looked up,
ruehlly. \"What I\'ve discovered is that mediation may be easy, but it
is not trivial.\" \"So true. Like flipping a pancake: It can be made to
look easy. . . .\" \"I didn\'t do my homework. What a dummy.\" Kayo
nodded gently. \"You were also the wrong person to mediate here. You are
hardly a disinterested party. And you have power over them. A mediator
is someone who leads &om a position of no power.\" \"I botched it. What
do we do now?\" \"Now they have forced the endgame. Each has taken a
position &om which he cannot back down. The role of the mediator, as I
see it, is to dance the two parties around that possibility, to help
them avoid taking fixed positions.\" \"Ah.\" \"But they did. Now you
need to reassign one of them. Some damage has been done, but you cut
your losses. At least, that is better than allowing the problem to
fester.\" That afternoon, Mr. Tompkins did his homework. He read The
Students\' Guide to Mediation cover to cover (it was only

sixteen pages long). He asked Mrs. Beerzig to order enough copies to be
distributed to the entire staff. Then, he wrote a memo for all, saying
that the organization was committed to soliciting and respecting the win
conditions of all parties, and to mediating differences when they arose.
Finally, he arranged with Gabriel to put together a small task force to
collect and document win conditions &-ompeople at all levels, and to
analyze them for potential problems. The failed mediation between Apfels
and Bolix was particularly embarrassing because he\'d had an obviously
better approach staring him in the face from the beginning: He should
have asked Diyeniar to mediate. The Maestro was disinterested and had no
positional power, he knew something about mediation (you didn\'t spend
all those years teaching kindergarten without learning a thing or two
about how conflicts are resolved), and he was a natural people-person.
Mr. Tompkins got off a quick e-mail message to the Maestro saying that
he would like him to be available to serve as a mediator in the future.
A few moments later, the response came back. \"Happy to help,\" it said.
Under the signature line was a short poem:

17ie road to wisrtbm, we& it \'s phin andsimpb to elCpress, Err and err
and err again, 6ut h s a n d h s and h s . - Pkt Hein

From Mr. Tompkins\' Journal:

Role of t h e Catalyst o

There is such a thing a s a catalytic personality. Such people
contribute t o projects by helping teams t o form and jell, and t o
remain healthy and productive. Even if our catalysts did nothing else
(they usually do a l o t else), their catalytic role is important and
valuable.

o

Mediation is a special case o f t h e c a t alytic role. Mediation is
learnable with a small investment.

o

The small ceremony beginning, \"May I help by trying t o mediate for
you?\" can be an essential f i r s t s t e p in conflict resolution.

s s would be the first weekend since Belok\'s mandate on seven-day
weeks. Of course, almost no one knew about the mandate, since Tompkins\'
New Working Hours memo, although it was addressed to all staff, had in
fact been delivered only to Minister Belok himself. Mr. Tompkins and
Belinda were in his ofice with the door closed. \"Belinda, I\'m
beginning to feel like a mental patient. I feel like a man living in his
own lie. I\'m losing track of what\'s real and what isn\'t. We doctor
the hours we send up to Korsach, we set fictitious policies we have no
intention of applying, we conceal the existence of our B and C projects,
I am continually assuring Belok that schedules will be met when I know
they won\'t. Something is awfUlly wrong here.\" Belinda shrugged.
\"That\'s for sure. But it\'s not your something.\" \"Isn\'t it? What
does a man of integrity do in such circumstances? The answer can\'t be
that he lies through his teeth.\"

\"You wouldn\'t think so. Webster, the obvious answer is that a person
of integrity has to draw a line in the sand and stand by it. You did
that. You told Belok to stuff it in his ear, as I remember.\" \"I did.
But then . . .\" \"Then, he chose deliberately not to hear you, and made
it impossible for you to do anything but lie to him. So, now you lie to
him. That\'s a problem, but it\'s his problem, not yours.\" \"It is
effectively mine as well. I\'m the one that has to do the lying. I
should walk away, Belinda. I really should. That would be the honorable
thing.\" \"There is a reason why we\'re here, Webster: the Project
Management Laboratory. We set out to discover some of the causal effects
that drive project work. And we\'re getting very close. We can\'t walk
away now. We\'d miss all the hn.\" \"Living the lie is not part of the
hn.\" \"No. My sympathy for that. You\'re paying the price so the rest
of us can have such interesting and involving work. But it\'s going to
be worth it,Webster. We just have to hold on a little longer. There is
another thing, too: You could walk away, as I could. Gabriel could. But
there are lots of other people who can\'t. You\'re their buffer. If you
leave, you\'ll be abandoning them to Belok.\" \"I know. I keep telling
myself all that. Only, I still feel like I\'m acting dishonorably.
Telling all these lies . . .\" \"Like the guy who lies to the mugger and
says he doesn\'t have any money on him, when he knows hll well there is
a twenty-dollar bill stuffed into his key case.\" \"It\'s still a lie.\"
\"It\'s still a mugger. Belok is a mugger.\" \"I\'m thinking about this
weekend, Belinda. I\'ve given my word, in a sense, that people will work
all weekend. Only, of

course, they won\'t, because I haven\'t asked them to. I\'m thinking
that, at the very minimum, I have to be here myself Saturday and Sunday.
That is the very least I can do to retain a bit of honor.\" \"Webster,
you turkey! This is going to be the most beautiful weekend of the year.
Perfect weather, changing colors, the last few days of Indian summer.
You have got to get away. Dr. Belinda is prescribing a fdl weekend for
you. This is not an option. No kidding.\" \"Thank you, Dr. Belinda, but
I think I have to stay.\" He looked forlornly out the window at the
splendid colors around Aidrivoli. It was indeed going to be a
spectacular weekend. \"I just wouldn\'t feel right getting away.\"
\"Well, we have to take some steps to make it okay. Let\'s see.\"
Belinda walked over to the window and stood there with her back to him.
She dropped her shoulders slightly and sighed. Then nothing. She kept
her silence for long enough to make him think her mind might have
drifted. Maybe it had. He never knew for sure what was going on inside
that mind. Sometimes, it was brilliant, and other times, merely kooky.
He had come to depend on her judgment almost utterly, but he still had
to wonder if she was completely cured of her devastating burnout, or
ever would be. She looked the part of the ultimate business executive in
her crisp blazer and skirt, but then there were those omnipresent bare
feet. . . . Finally, Belinda turned around to face him. \"Here is the
plan, Boss. This will work. We declare a three-day weekend and close the
entire complex, lock it up, force everybody to take off three fdl
days.\" \"Belinda! \"It will do them a world of good.\" \"But,
Belok-he\'s bound to find out.\" \"

\"Of course. Then, we\'ll have Mrs. Beerzig fill out the time sheets
showing one hundred sixty-eight hours per week for every single person
on the staff.\" \"Why one hundred sixty-eight?\" \"That\'s seven days
times twenty-four hours a day\" \"This is your solution? Instead of
lying a little, we lie a lot? Belok will see through this in a minute.\"
\"Of course, he will. But then what will he do? Nothing. The key thing
is that we\'re throwing down the gauntlet, but not obliging him to pick
it up. He has the option to ignore. He\'ll take that option,Webster, I
guarantee it.\" It seemed crazy, but the same Webster Tompkins who\'d
felt obliged to work through the entirety of a two-day weekend, for some
reason, now felt Gee to take the three-day weekend, once he had declared
it. There was no figuring out just why this was. It was. He decided not
to worry about it anymore. The Residence maintained an old black
Russian-made Lada sedan for the use of guests. Mr. Tompkins found his
name alone on the sign-up list for the weekend; the car was his. He
packed a lunch and headed toward the northeast into Morovia\'s interior.
By now, he had heard so many stories from Maestro Diyeniar about his
grandfather\'s hotel in the hilly region around Markst that he almost
felt the place was part of his own family history. The hotel was still
run by Diyeniar cousins. Mr. Tompkins got the Maestro to scribble down
some directions and then he headed off for a weekend at the hotel. If
nothing else, he would have the pleasure of a long, leisurely drive
through the countryside. The sky was clear, the weather cool and crisp,
and the tree colors nothing short of stunning.

Kayo\'s instructions told him to proceed east from the port town of
Onlijop and watch for Route 4 North just before entering Markst. He saw
a red-and-black sign for Route 4 South where it joined the Onlijop road.
All he had to do, he thought, was turn off at the next sign. Kayo had
assured him that Route 4 North would be clearly marked. He drove on,
watching for the sign, but he didn\'t see it. A few minutes later, he
found himself caught in the snarl of traffic around Markst\'s Saturday
morning farmers\' market. He had gone too far. He turned the little car
around and retraced his path. On the way out of Markst, he did see the
sign for Route 4 North, but he carried on past it, turned around, and
approached it again from the west, all to figure out why he had missed
the turn before. It was just idle curiosity. Was the turn not properly
marked in the other direction? Or, in spite of Kayo\'s assurance, was
the sign not easily seen when approaching &om the west? To his surprise,
the answer was neither; the sign was as big as life, clearly visible,
and unmistakably pointing him toward Route 4 North. Tompkins was
baffled.Why had he missed it the first time? Mr. Tompkins turned the car
around yet again and drove all the way back to the point where the two
roads first merged. The sign there for Morovian National Route 4 South
was a shield divided diagonally into red and black zones, with the
lettering in white. He reversed and continued driving to the sign for
Route 4 North, and there was the explanation of why he\'d been unable to
see it before. The sign was not a red-and-black shield with white
lettering, but a plain white circle with black lettering. Route 4
evidently changed its status here from a national to a county road.
Since he had been looking for a red-and-black shield, he had been

unable to see the other. With a chuckle, Mr.Tompkins turned and headed
north. You can\'t see what\'s as plain as the nose on your face if
you\'re sufilciently persuaded that it isn\'t there, Tompkins thought.
He had been utterly convinced that the sign would be a red-and-black
shield. He simply knew it. So he was looking confidently for the shield
and sailed by, entirely blind to the black-and-white sign that told him
where to turn north with Route 4. The laugh was definitely on him. What
a hoot. There was nothing funnier, really, than a joke on oneself. And
then, little by little, the incident began to seem less hnny to him.
Finally, it didn\'t seem hnny at all. He let the car slow down and
eventually drift to the side of the road, where he stopped it. He turned
off the ignition. Mr. Tompkins just sat there in the driver\'s seat,
staring off into the distant woods. The incident with the sign had not
just been a little lapse of logic on his part; it was more than that. It
was the essential human error. At least, it was the essential Tompkins
error. As he thought back over some of the key missteps he\'d made in
his career, there began to emerge a common pattern among them. In each
case, he had been aware of something important that he didn\'t know
(such as, where the black-and-red shield indicating Route 4 North would
turn up). In each case, he\'d been unaware that something he \"knew\"
would eventually turn out to be wrong (the sign marking the turn must be
a black-and-red shield). And, in each case, all his attention had been
focused on figuring out the answer to what he didn\'t know, rather than
reconsidering what he did know. \"That\'s my flaw,\" he thought. \"Maybe
it\'s everybody else\'s flaw as well, but it is certainly mine. That\'s
the essence of

where I go wrong. I get so convinced of my knowledge that I blind
myself to evidence proving that what I seem to \'know\' is wrong.\" Mr.
T. rested his head on the back of the car seat, and stared up into the
gray fabric above him. What was it now that he knew absolutely, but that
was dead wrong? What was his present blind spot? He had a gut feeling
that there was something there, something that could make a huge
difference in the way the projects back at Aidrivoli were approached. If
only he could figure it out. Somewhere among all his premises was one
that was flawed. If he could trap it now, it might open his eyes to some
possibility he\'d been blind to before. He closed his eyes and looked
inward, examining and making himself doubt even his most strongly held
convictions. He could hear Aristotle\'s voice inside his head: \'Think
not about adding, but about subtracting. . . .\' What was there that
could be subtracted &-omthe projects to make them run more efficiently?
What was the false belief he held that made it impossible for him to see
the signs that he now suspected were staring him squarely in the face?
He sat up and looked around. The setting, chosen quite at random, was
lovely. There was a gentle ridge running alongside the road. Spread out
beneath him was a colorfbl valley, with a narrow-gauge rail line running
along the side of a river. At the far end of the valley, the river
widened into a pond, ghstening now in the low sun. This would be a fine
place for a picnic. He pulled his boxed lunch and a blanket out of the
boot and set himself up on a slate outcropping where the ridge fell away
into the valley. Even after an unhurried lunch and then a little nap on
the grass beside the slate, he still hadn\'t discovered what the false
premise was. But he

knew that he would one day. Now that he was on the lookout for it, it
could not evade him for long. Before setting off again, he pulled his
journal out of his case and made one quick note. From Mr.
Tompkins\'Journal:

Human Error o

.It\'s not w h a t you don\'t know that kills you, . . . it\'s w h a t
you know t h a t isn\'t 50.

a r i s t o t l e Kenoros was a morning person. If he was going to make
an appearance, it was most often the first business of the day. This
morning, Mr. Tompkins arrived at his office to be told by Mrs. Beerzig
that Morovia\'s First Programmer was waiting for him inside. Mr. T.
found him sitting on the desk, staring up at a matrix of letters he had
drawn on the white board. \"A report card,\" Kenoros told him. \"I have
graded the teams on their internal design efforts. For the purposes of
this grade, I did not consider so much the quality of their designs as
whether they had produced a design at all. If you have a low-level
modular design that serves the function of a blueprint-that is, it
establishes what all the coded modules will be and what interfaces there
will be among them-then Kenoros gives you an A. If you have none, you
get an E In between, you get an in-between grade. Look at the pattern.\"
Mr. Tompkins sat down, stirring his coffee, and studied the matrix.

\"Tell me again,Aristotle, what an F means.\" \"It usually means the
project produced a political document and called it a design. The
document is typically some sort of a textual description of early
thinking about internal structure.\" \"Not really a design in your
terms.\" \"No. Of course, there is a design that comes about later, as a
by-product of coding. But the activity called \'design\' produces no
real design. That gets you an E\" \"Mmm. All the small teams got A\'s
and B\'s. The big teams got all the F\'s. What\'s going on?\" \"I ask
you. It is a puzzle.\" \"First of all, I note that the Oracle\'s concept
of Last Minute Implementation is going to be impossible without a good
design.\'\' \"Very good,Webster. You\'re getting warm.\" \"I\'m still
not sure why the A-Teams did so dismally. What I\'m sure of is that they
just can\'t hope to do many of the precoding steps we\'d like them to do
working with such designs.\"

19

PART AND WHOLE

\"Exactly. In fact, they are not going to be doing Last Minute
Implementation. The six A-Teams started coding long ago. I had no
success persuading them to defer implementation. I tried, but I had no
success.\" \"And the others?\" \"To varying degrees, all the B- and
C-Teams are trying out the Oracle\'s approach. They are all trying to
push back implementation, and to do as much verification work as
possible before a single line of code is written. Some of them are
trying rigorously to defer coding until the last sixth of the project.\"
\"And none of the A-Teams?\" \"None.\" \"Okay, I give up. What gives?\"
Kenoros plunked himself down in the easy chair across from Tompkins. He
was grinning, but not answering. Tompkins prodded him again. \"Why
didn\'t the A-Teams produce a design?\" \"Too big.\" \"What?\" \"This is
my theory. The teams were too big. During the whole time that design
should have been going on, they had too many people to involve in that
activity. Design is a job for a small group. You can put three or four
or maybe five people around a white board and they can do design
together. But you can\'t put twenty people around a white board.\" \"I
still don\'t see why that should inhibit design. You can put three or
four or five to work on design and put the rest to work on something
else. Why not? Why can\'t they do something else?\" \"What is the
something else?\" \"I don\'t know. Something else.\"

\"The design step is the critical act of dividing the whole into
pieces. Once you\'ve done that, then you have good opportunity to
allocate these pieces to people to work on separately. But before
you\'ve done it, you don\'t have pieces. What you\'ve got is a whole. As
long as it is a whole, people can only work on it in an undivided
group.\" \"That\'s still no excuse for skipping the design work. If it
has to be done, it has to be done. The manager could always put a small
team to work and tell everybody else to be patient, to just sit on their
hands, if there is nothing else to do.\" \"True. I think this is what
happened on Quickerstill-A,\" Kenoros said. \"But now, consider this
\'solution\' of yours fiom the standpoint of the project manager.
Suppose you are managing a big project yourself. You\'ve got thirty
people &-omday one. You have also got an aggressive schedule-that\'s why
they have loaded you up with so many people. Now, are you going to tell
twenty-five of your people to sit on their hands for the next two
months?\" \"I see what you mean. They would be ready for mutiny.\" \"Of
course. Also, you would stand out like a sore thumb. Imagine how you
look to your boss and your boss\'s boss. You\'ve got all this work to do
before June first and most of your people are goofing off.\" \"Mrnrn. I
don\'t look like a real manager.\" \"You don\'t. So, what do you do?\"
\"Well, I have to get those people working,\"Tompkins said. \"I guess I
look for early opportunities to peel off parts of the whole so I can
allocate it to them.\" \"Right. Since the design activity is, by
definition, concerned with peeling off parts in a sensible manner, you
shortcircuit that process to get the dividing up done as early as
possible.\"

19 PART AND WHOLE

\"I see. My early dividing up for work-allocation purposes makes a
mockery of design. Does that have to be so?\" \"Not entirely, but
largely. True, there are always a few marginal activities that can be
spun off before the design is done. But if you have to put a huge staff
to work, those few assignments are not going to be nearly enough.\" \"To
get the staff to work on real critical-path matters, I have to divide up
the design work itself.\" \"Now you are on the slippery slope that leads
eventually to no design,\" Kenoros said. \"You make a crude division of
the whole into five or ten pieces so you can put five or ten design
teams to work. That crude division is a design step, but you don\'t
approach it as such. You approach it as an exercise in personnel
allocation.\" \"And the initial crude division, as you call it, is the
heart of the design.\" \"It is. And since there is no one directly
responsible for revisiting its logic, it remains the heart of the
design. The result is no design. To make matters worse, it is coding and
testing that are the most efficient users of people, so there is always
the temptation to start these tasks almost immediately, even though no
design is complete.\" Mr. Tompkins was still not convinced. \"If it\'s
true, what you say, then most projects are effectively overstaffed
during the period when design should be done. So, most projects
wouldn\'t get any real design done.\" Kenoros smiled somewhat bitterly.
\"I\'m afi-aid that is the sad truth. Somewhere, today, there is a new
project beginning, overstaffed &om day one. The project will go through
all the steps, or at least seem to, but no design will be done. The
internal structures will evolve without ever being exposed to real
design thinking or review. And then, someday, years later,

when the product needs to be reworked, one of the new project\'s staff
members will do a thorough re-engineering of the design. He or she will
reconstruct the actual design. And what happens next is very sad.\"
\"What is that sad thing?\" \"That future reverse engineer will be the
first human being ever to set eyes on the real design of the product.\"
For most of the rest of the day, Mr. Tompkins rehashed the notion that
early overstaffing effectively precludes sensible design. To the extent
that Kenoros was right about this, the ramifications went far beyond
Aidrivoli. They suggested that the entire software industry might be
suboptimized in this way, addicted to early staff buildup and thus
making a sham of the key internal design activity. When Belinda wandered
in afier lunch,Tompkins dumped the whole idea on her. She seemed
unimpressed. \"So, what else is new? Management is all about compromise.
One of the things that gets compromised is the design. In order to get
people assigned, you accept a less than perfect design.\" \"Less than
perfect would be one thing. Suppose, though, you accept having no design
at all?\" \"There is always a design. It\'s just not as good as it ought
to be. Even in the case where the design phase is a total fiction, there
will be a design. Otherwise, your hture project person would never be
able to re-engineer it &om the code.\" \"Okay, I buy that. We are not
talking about a design versus no design. What we\'re really talking
about is a quality design versus something that emerges on its own, and
has no quality. Since nobody was doing any real design thinking

when the dividing up was required, the division is badly
suboptimized.\" Belinda cleared herself a section of white board. \"Now,
that is something we can get a handle on. Consider this.\" She began
sketching rapidly. \"This is the whole of our system, and these are its
parts.

\"This is only one way to divide the whole. There are infinitely many
other ways as well. Here, for example, is another.\" She sketched a
second partitioning next to the first. \"In order to judge which is the
better way to divide the whole into pieces, we need to consider the
resultant interfaces. Without getting too formal about it, the more
interfaces you have and the more complex they are, the worse the
partitioning.\" \"That\'s true, of course,\" Mr. Tompkins added, \"no
matter what it is you\'re dividing; whether you\'re dividing the system
or dividing work among your people.\" Belinda nodded. \"I\'ll get to
that. Now let\'s fill in the interfaces among the pieces. What we\'re
doing here is \'design evaluation,\' since we\'re going to choose the
partitioning that has the cleaner pattern of interfaces.\"

\"So, we pick the version on the right,\" Mr.Tompkins spoke up like an
overeager kid in class. \"Right. We choose it because it has fewer and
thinner interfaces among its pieces. Now, we allocate the pieces to
members of the team. The result is that partitioning of the work among
people is isomorphic to partitioning of the system into its parts.\" She
drew some more.

\"The interfaces among the people on the team are isomorphic to the
interfaces among the pieces of the whole that they\'ve been allocated.
So, . . .\" Belinda pointed to pairs of corresponding interface sets
from the two sides of the diagram, \" . . . the interface between
persons 3 and 4 of the project, for example, is isomorphic to the
interface between parts 3 and 4 of the product.\"

19 PART AND WHOLE

She sat down and looked back at her diagram. \"Now I\'m getting
depressed. When the work partitioning gets done in advance of the
design, we guarantee that the interfaces among people are more complex
than they really need to be.\" \"Exactly,\" Webster confirmed. \"The
total information shared by any two people to get their work done is
larger than if the design had preceded the work allocation. People are
forced to interact with more of their teammates in order to get anything
done, and the interactions are more complex. The result is, less
possibility of independent work, more telephone tag, more meetings, and
more hstration.\" She made a face. \"Ick. I think that\'s the story of
our early lives up there on the board, Webster. Ugly interfaces,
frustration, too many meetings. Can it all be because of early
overstaffing?\" \"I\'m beginning to think so.\" There was a knock at the
door, and Mrs. Beerzig announced the arrival of Avril Alterbek, manager
of PShop-C. Mr. Tompkins quickly beckoned Avril into the office. \"Hi,
folks. Any chance of a moment for me?\" \"Always,\" Mr.Tompkins told
her. He gestured to the chair opposite Belinda. \"What\'s up?\" Avril
sat down. \"Management intervention is required. This is going to cost
you.\" \"Oh, well, what do you need?\" Anything but time, he was
thinking. \"A ton of people.\" \"Ah.\" Mr. Tompkins paused a moment,
recollecting his rationale for keeping the B- and C-projects leanly sta
ed. We are not trying to run your project thin, Avril, just to save
money. We were worried about getting you overstaffed. Why, just as you
came in, we were talking about some of the unfor66

\$

tunate results o f . . .\" He stood up and walked over to the board,
ready to begin his lecture. \"I know all that, Webster,\" Avril stopped
him. \"I know what the reasoning was. But things are changing on my
project. We\'ve got a breathtaking design done. It\'s a thing of beauty.
Even Aristotle says it\'s about as pretty an internal design as he\'s
ever seen. Of course, he gave us a lot of help making it so elegant and
complete. Over the last few weeks, we\'ve been inspecting it and testing
it out on paper and proving it to ourselves. Of course, we\'re not done
yet with any of those tasks, but we\'re getting close. We can see the
work that lies ahead in very substantial detail. That\'s what we need
the people for,Webster. There are seven in staff now, and that\'s just
right for the moment: five designers and two in support staff. But two
months fiom now, we\'re going to have work for another twenty people.\"
Belinda leaned toward him, excited. \"Don\'t you see, Webster, this is
the other side of the coin. What we\'ve been talking about for the last
hour is the disaster of overstaffing prior to design. But their design
is nearly done. If we think of design as the critical partitioning act,
they\'ve done it. Now Avril\'s saying that she needs people to assign
the pieces to.\" \"Exactly. I just wanted to give you some notice. . .
.\" Belinda couldn\'t contain herself. \"How many pieces, Avril?\" \"Um,
1677 modules, some 1300 data items, 18 file structures, 20 builds . .
.\" ,\"Sounds like you could use even more than twenty additional
people.\" \"I could. I didn\'t want to be greedy, but I could use as
many as thirty-five. We\'ve got blocks of modules to assign for coding,
acceptance test suites to construct for all the builds,

19 PART AND WHOLE

code inspections, some documentation cleanup tasks. All this work is
almost completely spec\'ed and ready to assign. As I say, within six or
eight weeks . . .\" Belinda was on her feet. \"Give them to her,Webster,
he whole thirty-five. This is it. This is where we go for broke:\' \"NOW
wait a minute. We can\'t just dump thirty-hve people on Avril in
February. We\'d stop her progress ddad. She\'d have to spend all her
time bringing the new people up to speed.\" \"Give her thirty-five
people who know her application

I

1

Mr.Tompkins was baffled. \"Where the hell are we go\'ng to come up with
thirty-five people who know the ins and outs of PShop?\" \"Raid the
A-Team,\" Belinda said. After Avril was gone, Belinda and Webster stayed
on, mulling over the politics of the matter. \"I have no doubt you\'re
right, Belinda, no doubt at all. If we were unconstrained, that is just
what we would do. But with the situation as it is, I don\'t see how . .
.\" 1 \"\'What does the person of principle do?\' Wasn\'t that the
question you were asking earlier? And the answer you seerhed to come up
with was, Put the interests of the projects first,1 do what you can to
help them produce good work and get tkeir jobs done expeditiously. That
is the principle that has guibed you so far. Now it is telling you to
raid the A-Teams and but their people to work for the B- and C-Teams, as
their ndeds become clear.\'\' Mr. Tompkins tried to keep his voice
steady. \'\'Belok would eat us alive. Before the weekend, you gave me a
plari to

throw the gauntlet down to Belok but give him the option to ignore it.
If we throw this gauntlet down, he can\'t ignore it. He\'ll have to act.
We\'d be forcing h m to act.\" \"Eventually that\'s what we\'re going to
have to do.\'\' \"Eventually, yes. Just not this week. Avril says she
can wait two months. Give me two months and then I\'ll raid the A-Team,
I promise.\" \"She asked for people in two months, but the truth is that
it would be better to give her a core of four or five now to form the
nucleus of the expanded group.\" \"I know, but we\'ll have to wait. I
have great hopes that if we can only wait a month or two . . .\" He let
his voice trail o E In a month or two, Lahksa would be back, that\'s
what he was hoping. Or maybe NNL would be in charge again and would put
Belok back in the cage where the man had been kept before. Belinda
frowned. \"Avril\'s project is not the problem here. PShop is a
relatively big effort. If she will be ready for thirtyfive people in
February, what state do you suppose QuickerStill-B and -C and PMill-B
and -C are in today? Those smaller projects are probably fbrther along
than Avril\'s. And they\'re going to need expanded staff almost
immediately. We have to raid all the A-Teams, Webster, and we\'ve got to
begin it now.\" He stared down at his hands for a long moment. \"I
know,\" he said softly. Belinda was at the board again. \"When the
detailed, lowlevel modular design is done, opportunities for splitting
up the work explode. That\'s not just true for our projects, but for all
projects. That\'s telling us something that we\'ve missed all these
years, something the whole industry has missed. Look, we\'ve been
accustomed to staff projects like this.\" She drew

swiftly on the board. \"But the ideal staffing curve is entikely
different.\"

Mr. Tompkins tried to focus on her drawing rather than1 on the political
dilemma of diverting people &-omthe A-Teams. \"Um, . . . ideal staffing.
Yes, I think you\'re right. That is what the evidence is telling us and
it certainly is at odds with c\'onvention. I admit that I never staffed
a project that way. h o t until now, anyway.\'\' \"I have, now that I
think about it. But the projects that I kept thin until late and then
added lots of people to were typically the more casual ones. I\'d never
have done it on a mission-critical development. Maybe I should have.\"
\"Mmm.\" \"Webster, this may be the explanation for something that I\'ve
always wondered about. It\'s been my privatemaybe highly
jaded\--suspicion that whenever projects were scheduled aggressively,
they were doomed. I mean those projlects where people are talking
frankly about an aggressive schedule, I\'ve always felt that those
projects probably finished about two months to a year later than they
would have if they\'d been started off with a schedule that wasn\'t
aggressive.\" I Mr. Tompkins was smiling. \"That\'s the experiment we
really should have run: two projects building the exact skme

product, one on a n aggressive schedule and the other on a sensible
schedule.\" \"The sensible schedule project would have finished earlier,
I\'m sure o f it.\" From Mr. Tompkins\' Journal: S t a f f Level o

Early overstaffing tends t o force projects into shortcutting t h e key
design activity ( t o give all those people something t o do).

o

When work is divided over a large s t a f f p r i o r t o completion o f
design, t h e interfaces among people and among work groups are n o t
minimized.

o

This leads t o increased interde endence, meeting time, rework, and
rustration.

o

Ideal s t a f f i n g requires a small core team for most of t h e
project, and then significant numbers o f people added late in t h e
process (as late a s t h e l a s t sixth of scheduled time).

o

Awful suspicion: Projects t h a t s e t o u t t o achieve \'aggressive\'
schedules probably take longer t o complete than they would have if s t
a r t e d with more reasona ble schedules.

P

p a s s i n g through the reception area first thing in t h e morning,
Mr.Tornpkins noticed that a fax was coming in. He looked at the partial
page that was already printed and saw that it began \"My dear Webster.\"
His heart skipped a beat. There was only one person who addressed him
that way. He collected a cup of coffee for himself and came back just as
the full sheet was released. With the fax in hand, he repaire to his
office, closing the door behind him. Maybe it would say when she was
coming home.

d

My dear Webster, Well, I found you another good one. Consultant, I mean.
I just put him on the corporate jet this afternoon. Be a dear, and pick
him up around 9 tomorrow. Don\'t worry about me, as I am having a lovely
time and not getting into too much trouble (for me, anyway). And don\'t
worry about you, either. I\'ll take care of everything as soon as I get
back. I

Fondly, Lahksa

Wonder what that meant? Oh, well, there was no figuring out a
complicated creature like Lahksa. It would all become clear in time. At
least, it seemed like she might be coming home soon. Not a word about
where she was, but there was one tiny clue: The sending fax machine had
time-stamped her message on the way out. It was marked 11:58 EM.The time
in Morovia was just shy of 8 A.M., which meant it was nearly 2 A.M. in
New York. So, Lahksa\'s fax must have come &om two time zones west of
New York, in Mountain Time. He got out his dayplanner and turned to its
little map of time zones to doublecheck that the Mountain Time region
included Alberta, Saskatchewan, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado,
Arizona, and New Mexico. He closed h s eyes and tried to imagine
Lahksa\'s presence in one of those locations. . . . He decided afier a
moment that she might be in New Mexico. If she\'d put her new recruit on
a jet in the Mountain Time zone yesterday afternoon, local time, then
why would it take the guy until nine this evening to arrive? Whoops. She
must have meant 9 A.M., this morning. He jumped up, looking at his
watch. He would have to round up a ride to take him out to the
airport-pronto. Only one person stepped from the jet-a tall, somewhat
dazed-looking man with a red-tinged beard. He stumbled over to
Mr.Tompkins and asked,\"Where am I?\" \"Morovia.\" \"My goodness.\" He
stared around him in surprise and observed, as much to himself as to
anyone else, \"I\'ve just met the most extraordinary woman. She attended
my class in Santa Fe and we had a bite to eat after it was over. She
asked me if I\'d consider doing a day of consulting in Morovia. I said
I\'d love to-except for the fact that I had sworn off air travel.

She told me that modern travel in a corporate jet could be almost
painless: The first thing you know you\'re there. Then she proposed a
toast with her water glass, said \'drink up,\' and I drank up and . .
.\" \". . . and the first thing you knew, you were here.\" \"Exactly.
Amazing.\" \"How is she, by the way?\" \"Oh, fine. Lovely, fascinating,
full of beans. I get the feeling there is even more to her than meets
the eye.\" \"You don\'t know the half of it.\" \"She said\'drink up\'
and then the steward was shaking me and saying it was time to de-plane.
Say, you don\'t suppose she . .. ?\" \"I do.\" Mr. Tompkins held out his
hand. \"Webster Tompkins, by the way. I\'m your client.\" \"Oh. Pleased
to meet you. Harry Winnipeg.\" Mr. Tompkins was impressed. \"Harry
Winnipeg, the author? You\'ve written a lot of books, if I\'m not
mistaken.\" \"Yes, tons.\" \"How is that? I mean, how is having all
those books out there with your name on them?\" \" A d l . There are so
many that every time I think up a good idea for a new book, I\'ve got to
wonder whether I\'ve already used it in one of my other books.\" \"You
don\'t remember?\" \"No, actually not, not every point. Sometimes, I
pick up one of my books from twenty years ago or so and read it; it
might as well be by someone else.\" And then, with a modest smile, he
added: \"It\'s usually pretty good stuff, though.\" \"So, what do you
do? To make sure you\'re not repeating yourself, I mean.\" \"I have a
hll-time researcher who does nothing but read my own books. Say, is
there breakfast in our fiture?\"

\"Yes. Coming up.\" Mr. Tompkins piled with his new consultant into the
back of the Institute\'s ancient Buick and told the driver to head
toward the old town ofVarsjop, where there were some nice little coffee
shops. He turned back to his new guest. \"Tell me, Dr. Winnipeg, how do
you do your consulting? I mean,What are your specialty areas?\" \"You
know, I often wonder that myself. Mostly, I just sniff around and look
for problems.\" He looked across the car at Mr.Tompkins. \"But I have a
hunch you\'re going to tell me you don\'t really have any problems. Oh,
just some little minor annoyances maybe, but nothing significant.\"
\"Well, fknny you should say that. That\'s rather perceptive of you. In
fact, that\'s exactly what I was going to say. How did you know that?\"
Dr. Winnipeg looked amused. \"That\'s what people always say when they
have a lot of problems.\" \"Oh.\" They rode along for a short spell in
silence. \"Since you seem to have us typed so well, Dr. Winnipeg, maybe
you could predict what kind of problems we might have.\" A wide yawn.
The man was still waking up. \"Oh, sure. People problems, I guess. That
would be the most common.\" Mr.Tompkins thought for a while. \"What
would you say if I told you that one of my project managers is curiously
angry?\" \"I would say you\'ve got a people problem.\" Mr. Tompkins
introduced Dr. Winnipeg to Melissa Alber, who led him away to take part
in the weekly PMi11-A staff meeting. It was not until just before noon
that his new consultant showed up again.

\"Angry manager all taken care of, Webster. You needn\'t worry about it
anymore.\" \"I needn\'t?\" \"Nope. I demoted him.\" \"You did?\" \"I
did.\" \"Did he accept that? I mean, he doesn\'t exactly work for you
.\" \"He not only accepted it, he grabbed onto it like a drowning man
grabs a life jacket. I figure you and Melissa can work out the details.
Anyway, Osmun is demoted.\" \"Well . . .\" \"It\'s not clear exactly
what he\'s demoted to. But he\'s not running the PMill-A project
anymore.\" \"Oh. Well, I shall have to give some thought to finding a
replacement. I don\'t doubt that there are some good possibilities fiom
within the project itself. I\'ll have to talk to Melissa about that.\"
Dr. Winnipeg looked at him sharply. It was as if he were puzzled that
Mr. Tompkins hadn\'t seen something obvious. \"Why don\'t you bag the
project, Webster? PMill-B and -C seem to be in pretty good shape. The A
project has just been through too much. Progress has come to a grinding
halt; nobody has any idea of what to do next; the design is a botch; the
implementation effort is, as you\'d expect, totally rnisdirected. All
that\'s required now is an act of mercy by you to free those people to
get started on something else. Time to cut your losses. I\'m sure you
know this already.\" \"Yes, well-but there are political considerations
here. It\'s important to keep the project alive.\" \"Too late for that,
I\'m afiaid. It\'s already dead.\" \"Propped up, then, to look alive.\"

\"Ah, a zombie. When you prop up a dead project to make it look alive
for political reasons, you\'re creating a zombie. I figure about ten
percent of all projects worldwide are probably zombies. PMill-A is
yours. Or one of yours. I don\'t doubt there are others.\', Mr. Tompkins
changed the subject. \"What shall we do with Osmun?\" \"He says that
there is no staff group ready to take on the problems of configuration
management for the products as they near completion. He\'d like to have
that job.\" \"Hrnm. Well, he\'s certainly right that we\'ve let that go
for too long. And, nobody else is clamoring for the position. Why not? I
suspect that he\'s got something to prove now, and he\'ll do it well.\"
Dr-Winnipeg had a faraway look. \"I wish you could have seen his face
when I told him he didn\'t have to be the manager anymore. It was as
though the years were being stripped away. Didn\'t it ever occur to you
before to let him off the hook?\" \"Let him off the hook?\" What a
curious way to phrase it, thought Webster. \"It certainly occurred to me
to replace him, if that\'s what you mean. I knew I would have to do
something. I had been dreading it.\" \"The poor man was begging for
relief. All you had to do was give him permission to step down.\'\' Mr.
Tompkins shook his head. \"I never thought of it that way.\" Apparently,
resolution of the Osmun Gradish affair had taken only a few minutes. As
soon as the staff meeting was adjourned, Dr. Winnipeg and Osmun had
repaired to his

office. After a very shoa conversation, they came out, both looking
pleased. They explained to the staff that Osmun was being transferred to
a new responsibility. Then, Osmun went back into his office to pack. Dr.
Winnipeg spent the rest of the morning wandering around the Aidrivoli
complex, looking for anything else that might benefit fi-om a fresh
perspective. One thing that he found was on the Air Traffic Control
project. He happened upon a working meeting mid-morning and sat in for
an hour and a half, not saying much of anything. After lunch, he took
Mr. Tompkins back to the meeting. O n the way in, he counseled Mr.T.
\"Don\'t pay too much attention to what\'s going on. What I want you to
do most of all is observe who is there.\" The meeting was in the largest
conference room in Aidrivoli-3. The tables had been arranged in a huge
oval with Gulliver Menendez, the project leader, sitting at the head.
Mr. Tompkins caught his eye and nodded to him before sitting with Dr.
Winnipeg quietly in the back. The first thing he did was to count the
people present. There were thirty-one, not including themselves. Dr.
Winnipeg leaned his head toward Webster and whispered: \"Seven in staff,
plus three consultants,\" and then, pointing his way around the
oval,\"the Ministers of Transport, Tourism, Harbors, and Airports, and
their technical aides; three representatives of the European Air Traffic
Control Task Force; two MSEI counselors; ATC technical personnel on loan
fi-om the Spanish government; the military air-traffic coordinator; four
people from the Korsach airport staff;the Commissioner of General
Aviation; the Commissioner of Communications and Telecommunications plus
her aides; the head of the Morovian Olympic Committee; a representative
of the Inter-

national Olympic Committee; and the Minister of Fairs and Congresses.\"
\"What on earth are they discussing?\"Mr. Tompkins whispered back.
\"Signaling protocol between aircraft and the towers.\" Mr.Tompkins
sighed. \"How long have they been at it?\" \"Gulliver told me at the
break that this was the sixth day of the meeting.\" \"God.\" They
watched without comment for an hour. It was dreadful. Clearly, everyone
in the room was finding the meeting unbearable. Finally, Dr. Winnipeg
leaned in again to whisper,\"Put me in, coach.\" Mr.Tompkins stood and
made his way to the head of the room. \"Um, Gulliver, if you would
permit . . .\" Gulliver looked relieved. \"Oh, please. Thank you,
Webster. Thank you.\" He loosened his tie and popped open the top button
of his shirt. \"Ladies and Gentlemen, this is Mr. Tompkins, the head of
development here and manager of all activities at Aidrivoli.\" \"Thank
you, Gulliver. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have been observing only for a
short time. But even in this short time, I sense a good measure of
fiustration in the room.\" There were loud groans of agreement fiom all
sides. \"I thought so. Just this morning, I was leafing through an old
book by the American writer Harry Winnipeg that I happened to have on my
bookshelf. In this book, he talks a bit about fiustration. I thought of
that passage almost fiom the first moment I entered this room. The
passage suggests that frustration is a kind of gold that you can mine to
find out more about what makes you tick: you as an individual or, in
this case, you as a working group. I think I know a way to

help you mine some of this frustration, to help you out of your present
morass. Are you game?\" There was a chorus of agreement. \"Very well
then. I\'d like to introduce formally the gentleman who has been
observing your meeting for much of the day. Ladies and Gentlemen, Dr.
Harry Winnipeg.\" Dr. Winnipeg took his position at the front. He sat
down comfortably on the edge of the head table. \"You don\'t need me to
tell you what the problem is. You all know what it is. Somebody say
it.\" \"Too many people,\" one of Gulliver\'s staff members spoke up.
\"Whatever we\'re discussing, it\'s only of interest to a handhl of
us,\" someone else shouted &om the back. Too many people, most of them
not involved in any given matter,\" Dr. Winnipeg summed up. He turned to
Gulliver. \"How bad is it? If we were to take a census of all the people
involved in any way in this project, what percent of them are here in
this room today?\" Gulliver looked around. \"A hundred percent, or very
close. A hundred percent minus two who are sick.\" \"I see. Now, how
could that have happened? Gulliver, could you just hand me the agenda,
just to check something out?\" \"Um, well, the agenda is sort of
informal. By that I mean, we\'re here to get the project going, you
could say. That is the agenda.\" \"There is no published agenda, then.
Well, you\'re not the first person to run a meeting with no published
agenda, Gulliver. Don\'t feel alone in that. But it does have some
consequences. To understand clearly, put yourself in the position of
this gentleman,\" he strolled over to stand beside the Minister of Fairs
and Congresses,\"this gentleman whose name is . . . ?\" 6.f

\"Horsjuk,\" the man supplied. \"Minister Horsjuk. If Minister Horsjuk
was wondering, just before the start of this meeting, whether he ought
to attend or not, what did he have to go on? Nothing. How could he know
that it would be entirely safe for him not to attend? Well, he had no
way to know that. \"Now, that might not have mattered if, in general, he
felt pretty safe about this project. But, frankly, nobody feels very
safe about this project. We all understand that the project is up
against some very serious challenges. There is also the uneasy feeling
in the air that if it fails-and projects do sometimes fail-there might
be some blame to be apportioned. So, the general sense of safety is not
high. If people are feeling a little unsafe and a meeting is called with
no agenda, they have to attend. Do you see that?\" \"I should have
published an agenda,\" Gulliver conceded ruefully. \"Sorry, people. I
won\'t make that mistake again.\" \"No great harm done,\" Dr. Winnipeg
told him gently. \"The beginnings of projects are often a bit
disorganized. The hidden agenda of early meetings is always to figure
out who all the key players are. So, even if you had published an
agenda, you might have had too many people show up.\" \"Ah. But they
wouldn\'t have had to stay all this time,\" the young project manager
pointed out. \"True. As soon as they got the flavor of the people
involved, they could leave as long as there was nothing specific on the
agenda that required them to stay. Well, that\'s almost the whole truth.
To make it whole you\'d have to satistjr them on one key matter. Any
idea what that would be?\" Gulliver considered for a moment. \"I guess
they\'d have to be sure that I was going to run the meeting according to
the agenda.\"

\"Exactly. If you satisfied them on that score, then they\'d look down
over the remaining agenda items and excuse themselves if they felt safe
not being present for those discussions.\" He turned back to the
assembled group. \"How would you all feel about that?\" The entire group
signaled approval Morovian-style by knocking their knuckles on the
table. \"Good. So, a published agenda for each meeting; short meetings
so that they can each be dedicated to a small enough subject, likely to
require the attendance of only a small subset of the whole working
group; and meetings conducted exactly according to the agenda so people
feel safe that there won\'t be extra topics addressed. Easy enough?\"
Gulliver Menendez nodded. \"Easy enough.\" \"That will go a long way
toward making your meetings smaller and less frustrating. But there will
still be some that That will happen when the subject is likely to are
just too be particularly amusing, or the fireworks particularly grand.
What are you going to do about those cases?\" \"Uh . . . I don\'t
know.\" \"Let me suggest a ceremony to begin each and every meeting. If
you use this ceremony properly, it will trim all your meetings and, best
of all, focus everyone\'s attention on the value of keeping meetings
small. Will you try out this ceremony with me?\" He addressed the
question to the whole group. There were nods around the room. Dr.
Winnipeg raised Gulliver Menendez to his feet and positioned him at the
front of the room. \"The ceremony has five parts. One, you declare,
Gulliver, the value of releasing even one person &om the meeting and
your intention to do so. Two, the group gives you its consent. Three,
you select and release at least one person based on the critical nature
of work

a\.

that he or she could do if released. Four, that person makes a parting
statement to the group about what he or she would like to see happen at
the meeting. Five, the group signals approval as the person leaves.\"
\"Okay,\" Gulliver nodded. \"Let\'s begin. Part one, you look around at
the size of the group and declare your intentions. Go ahead.\" \"Um.\"
Gulliver looked around.\"Well, there are a lot of us here today, aren\'t
there? Too many. I, uh, I think I\'d be inclined to release someone,
just to trim the group a bit.\" \"Part two: The rest of you signal
agreement.\" Laughter around the room. \"Go for it, Gulliver,\"someone
shouted out. There were c d s of \"Yes!\" and \"How about me?\"
Dr.Winnipeg raised one hand to quiet the group. \"Good. Part three: You
pick someone and . . .\" Gulliver pointed toward one of his lieutenants.
\"You, Konrad. Pack it up. You\'re out of here.\" \"Whoa,\" Dr. Winnipeg
said. \"Carefd that you don\'t cause him to lose face. Remember, you
have to release the person or persons whose time you value most. You
have to be utterly honest about this and you have to make sure everyone
knows it. Now tell me, honestly, whose time have you been most upset
about tying up in this meeting?\" \"Ah.\" Gulliver walked over to one of
the Spanish ATC consultants, a member of the project\'s technical
staff7and one of the Korsach new-tower personnel, who happened to be
sitting together. \"That would be these three. They could be meeting
alone to work out some of our key protocols. Freeing them from this
meeting would be invaluable.\" He looked back at Dr. Winnipeg for
approval. \"So, I am releasing the three of you &.omthis meeting.\"
\"Good. Part four: The selected people gather their things together,
stand up, and make a parting statement.\"

They stood. One of them, with a glance at the others, spoke up. \"I
think I could speak for the group. What we\'d like to see you do in our
absence is firm up who will be the Euro ATC liaison, and appoint a
working group to be responsible for \'passing\' aircraft into Morovian
airspace. Anything else?\" He looked at his colleagues on either side.
They both shook their heads. Then, all three gathered their materials
and started toward the door. \"Part five,\" Dr. Winnipeg told the room,
\"the rest of you signal approval as they leave.\" There was a thunder
of knuckles knocking on the tables as the three selected people made
their way out. \"That\'s your ceremony. Projects have need of ceremony,
you know; projects are living things, sociological organisms. I advise
you to perform this particular ceremony at the beginning of every
meeting. Make it part of your routine so everyone learns the drill.\"
Dr. Winnipeg sat down. Gulliver remained standing. He paused a moment.
\"Given what we\'ve just learned, I think the only remaining order of
business for today is to adjourn. Our next meeting, I assure you, will
be announced with a very carehlly crafted agenda.\" He paused again.
\"I\'m just waiting for those three to come back, before I adjourn.\"
\"Oh, I don\'t think they\'re coming back,\" Mr. Tompkins laughed. \"Not
a chance.\" At the end of the day, Mr. Tompkins took Dr. Winnipeg back
to the airport. \"Well,\" he said, as they waited for the plane to taxi
up to the airport door,\"this has been quite an experience. I learned
about zombie projects and some of the reasons for over-ful meetings and
how to correct them. I\'ve been reading your

books all these years, but it was still an enlightening experience to
see you work. And, I do thank you for resolving the problem of our angry
manager. I think it was the right solution. I\'m just a little
embarrassed not to have seen it myself.\" \"It was a pleasure.\" \"Why
was he so angry, by the way? Why was he so angry as to be abusive to his
people, yelhng and shouting at them in front of their peers and showing
contempt? Did you ever figure that out?\" \"Oh yes, that was the easy
part. I knew the answer to that before I even met him.\" The steward was
at the door, beckoning to Dr. Winnipeg to board. Mr. Tompkins nodded at
him and signaled for a minute or two of grace. He turned back to his
companion. \"I\'d love to hear your take on that.\'\' Dr. Winnipeg
nodded. \"It was fear,Webster. The man was scared to death. He was
afraid he was going to fail, afraid he was going to let you down, afraid
he was going to let his people down, afraid he was going to let his
country down.\" \"He was angry because he was afraid?\" \"He showed
anger because he was afraid. Anger is fear. Fear is considered an
unacceptable emotion in the workplace; you\'re not allowed to show it.
But something needs to be let out. You have to pick a surrogate emotion
or else you will pop. For some reason, anger is an acceptable emotion,
so that is almost always the one you pick. Anger becomes the surrogate
for fear. I don\'t mean to say there aren\'t other explanations for
anger in the family or anger among &-iends,but in business, it\'s almost
always fear.\"

From Mr.Tompkins\'Journal:

o

Keep meetings small by making i t safe for unessential people n o t t o
attend. A published agenda, rigorously followed, is t h e easiest way t
o make nonattendance safe.

o

Projects have need of ceremony.

o

Use ceremony t o focus attention on project goals and ideals: small
meetings, zero-defect work, etc.

o

Take steps t o protect people from abusive anger.

o

Remember: Anger = Fear. Managers who inflict abusive, angry behavior on
their subordinates are almost always doing i t because they\'re afraid.

o

Observation: If everybody understands t h a t Anger = Fear, anger will
be a t r a n s p a r e n t signal t h a t t h e angry person is afraid;
since there is an inclination n o t t o reveal fear, he o r she won\'t
be able t o vent t h e anger anymore. (This doesn\'t solve t h e angry
person3 problem, b u t i t sure can make i t easier on everyone else.)

S h e reappeared as mysteriously as she had lefi. The door to her
office, which had been closed now for nearly ten months, was open. She
was inside, sitting in her regular easy chair by the window, staring
peacefully out at the rain. His first impulse was . . . well, he wasn\'t
quite sure what the first one was. His second impulse was to lash out,
and it came almost immediately after the first. \"Where the hell have
you been?\" His voice came out much louder than he had intended. She
looked up, smiling shyly. \"Webster.\" \"Goddarnrnit, Lahksa, you lefi
us in the lurch. All these months without even a phone call . . .\"
\"I\'m back, Webster.\" She stood and crossed the room to meet him at
the door. \"Where the hell have you been?\"he repeated. \"Bermuda. Or,
at least, most recently. Do you like my tan?\" \"I hate it. I am really
annoyed, Lahksa. I really am.\" \"I think he missed me.\"

\"I am disappointed and annoyed and irritated and angry and ticked off
and let down and provoked and disturbed and . . .\" \"He did miss me. I
missed you too,Webster.\" She kissed b. He stepped back, unsure of
himself. After a moment, he said, in a quieter voice,\"Do you think that
makes it all okay?\" It did, of course. \"Webster.\" His irritation
welled up in him again. \"We were worried sick about you. We didn\'t
know. . . And, things have been going dreadhlly here. We could have used
a little help.\" \"Oh, dear, I do know about that. Belok?\" \"Damn
right, Belok. I could have used some advice, at the very least.\"
\"Well, don\'t worry your head about it anymore, dear. I\'ve taken care
of Belok.\" \"You have?\" \"I have. He\'s gone for the foreseeable
hture.\" \"And to what do we owe that good luck?\" \"Well, the poor man
has come down sick with somethmg.\" \"Something serious, I hope.\'\'
\"Not fatal, mind you, but nasty. He\'s got herpes.\" \"Erghhh. Not the
kind that gets you right in the . . .\" \"Yes, I\'m afiaid so. He\'s got
a perfectly terrible case of it. Awfully painhl, I understand. Anyway,
he has gone off to a clinic in Atlanta that has a patented treatment for
that kind of herpes.\" \"Oh, my. And you say he\'ll be gone for a
while?\"All that really mattered, of course, was for him to stay away
another nine months or so, until Tompkins\' contract was done. \"A year.
He\'ll be out of pain as soon as they begin treatment, but he won\'t be
able to leave. He\'s got to keep up with his daily treatments. I don\'t
think we\'ll be seeing anymore ofAUair.\"

Mr. Tompkins was struck by a horrible thought. \"Wait a minute, how did
he happen to come down with this saction? And how did it happen to
coincide so exactly with your return?\" She smiled her lopsided smile.
\"Dear me, how can I tell you this,Webster? There is something rather
awfd about me, I\'m afiaid. I have a terrible habit. I don\'t know what
comes over me. I put things in people\'s drinks.\" \"You put herpes in
his drink?\" \"So to speak. He drinks Southern Comfort. I\'d picked up a
special little powder on my travels, just a pinch, and I emptied it all
into his Southern Comfort. I did this Friday night in Korsach. By
Saturday morning, he was in agony. I had picked up the phone number of
the clinic in Georgia; actually, I got it from the same source who sold
me the powder. Anyway, I made a call that morning, and by yesterday
Allair was on his way in the corporate jet. I came here on the train as
soon as that was taken care of.\" \"The six A-Team projects are all
zombies,\" Mr. Tompkins told them. \"They are long dead, only propped up
to look ahve for political reasons. With the unfortunate departure of
our beloved Minister Belok, . . .\" An unseemly snicker from Kenoros. .
. . the \'political reasons\' cease to exist. So, I say we now do what
Belinda has been urging for the last few weeks: Raid the A-Teams.\" \"I
did use the term raid when I proposed that to you, Webster. But you
can\'t use it; not when you announce what\'s going to happen. We have to
think out very carefully how this is to be presented to the staff.\" \"

\"Point taken, Belinda. We need to present it so no face is lost. The
A-Team projects are zombies, but the people on them aren\'t. They have
feelings. How shall we put it to them? Melissa?\" \"You\'ll be rescuing
them,Webster. They all know, they\'ve known fiom the beginning, that
only one product will go out the door. Two of the teams will not produce
the winning version. PMill-A, for example, has known for a while now
that they were not going to be the winner. I have a hunch the other
A-Teams are similarly aware. We need to present this as a rescue of
valuable resources. We\'re moving them out of a dead-end effort and back
onto the critical path.\" \"Something like that,\" Gabriel agreed.
\"What we don\'t want to do now, however, is move the A-Team people
directly onto the B- and C-Teams. If we do that, half of them will be
set up for a second defeat.\" He crossed the room to the white board and
began to draw. \"What I propose instead is that we set up staff groups
under each product manager, and use the A-Team personnel to populate
these groups.\"

The assembled management team stared up at the ex-General\'s diagram.
\"That\'s a beginning,\" Mr. Tompkins told them. \"What you\'ve just
drawn, Gabriel, is a proposed re-design for our

system. We design and build systems here, but we also are a system.
You\'ve just redesigned us. Before we move into implementation, I
suggest we treat this like any other design, force it through the same
process we\'ve been using with sofiware designs on the B- and C-Teams.\"
He turned to Kenoros. \"Aristotle, will you guide us?\" Kenoros stood
up, smiling. \"Okay, Boss.\" He addressed the group. \"People, put your
design hats on. Okay? Okay. Here we go.\" With Belok out of the picture,
no one could fault Mr.Tompkins for returning to the original schedule.
He had done that promptly. There was a huge sense of relief around the
complex. The new date was one that gave a good chance to all the B and C
projects, even the largest of them The smaller ones, the Quickerstill
projects, for example, were likely to finish well ahead of the new
target. In fact, he had still not given up his hope that at least one of
them would be able to deliver its product by June first. Belok was gone,
but Tompkins was still focused on Belok\'s damn date. He had even
instructed Mrs. Beerzig to maintain the countdown in his office for June
first. On this mid-February day it read:

ONLY

DAYS TILL D-DAY!

Once the groups had been successhlly restructured, there was precious
little for Mr. Tompluns to do. He wandered about most days, chatting
with people, picking up scuttlebutt, expressing admiration for all the
good work, and, most of all, looking for opportunities to lend a hand.
There weren\'t many

of these. The projects were proceehng smoothly, and he was beginning to
feel extraneous. Belinda, too, had the feeling. She was spending more
and more time back in the harbor park, sitting under her palm tree,
reading. She almost never came in anymore, unless the weather was
dismal. Mr.Tompkins joined her in the park one afternoon, bringing along
a box lunch for them both. \"Nothing to do,\" he told her. She grinned.
\"Your job is done, Webster. T h s is the way the ends of projects are
supposed to be, but almost never are. All you\'ve got lefi to do now is
pick up your binoculars and watch how it all turns out, just like
General Patton.\" When she had first recalled that scene &-omthe film
all those months ago, Webster had been rather charmed. From that early
vantage point, he couldn\'t imagine a better ending than one that let
him confidently observe the outcome, knowing fidl well that all his
plans were about to succeed. But now that he was in just that position,
he was going crazy. He wondered if Patton hadn\'t felt the same way.
Afier lunch, having lefi Belinda in the park, he stopped by the
Residence library and found a copy of the film. He took the video
upstairs to his suite and viewed just the beginning scene of Patton
watching the battle through binoculars. To Webster\'s surprise, the
scene unfolded slightly differently &om what Belinda had remembered.
True, Patton observed almost all the battle without doing a thing. He
had indeed already done his part in planning the maneuvers, training the
fighting divisions, securing supplies, and timing the initial attack.
But, at the very end of the scene, he put his binoculars down for a
moment and dispatched a courier to General Bradley with a minor change
of plan. He had intervened. Now, that was real management. You train all
the troops so that the battle is

almost certain to unfold flawlessly. You watch quietly, just to be sure
that it does. But when something goes even a little bit awry, you
intervene. \"Things are going so smoothly I\'m bored,\" Molly Makmora
told him about the Quickerstill-C project. \"That\'s good, mind you. A
nice side effect of Kenoros\'s design scheme is that it provides us with
excellent metrics to monitor this part of the project. We know exactly
how many modules there are; and we can predict fairly precisely how many
lines of code, how many expected defects, how much time per defect on
average, how much work remains in each of the categories of work. . .
.\" \"How can you be sure that your projections for lines of code will
be so good?\" \"Well, we ve got about half the modules coded already. We
can see how our projection technique worked on the first four hundred or
so modules, so we can feel pretty comfortable that it will work as well
on the rest. \"What really gives us a sense of control is the build
plan,\" she went on. \"Here, look at this.\" She walked with him to the
Quickerstill-C war room and then led him to one wall where there was a
multicolored graph on display. \"We originally planned to deliver the
product in 60 builds. Each build is a subset of the whole, and each one
adds incrementally to the one before. So, here we are today at Build
Number 24. As you can see &om this work sheet, Build 24 includes these
409 modules. Build 23, which we completed last week, . . .\" she found
the related work sheet for Build 23, \". . . had 392 modules. So, we\'re
adding 17 modules in this new build. And, here, you see the module
IDSand sizes of those 17 modules.\" \"Nice.\" 7

\"More than nice. We have calibrated each build in terms of its
percentage of the whole product. Remember that the whole product was
originally sized at 1500 bnction points. We subsequently revised that
upward to 1850. When we put Build Number 1 together, we observed that it
implemented about 2 percent of the whole, or 37 function points. Build 2
added another 30, so when Build 2 was complete and proved out, we knew
that we had successhlly implemented 67 function points out of the whole
of 1850, or 3.6 percent. We concluded from that that the integration
work-that is, that portion of the project beginning with Build 1 and
culminating in fdl-product delivery-was 3.6 percent done. \"Now, this
graph shows the same kind of conclusions for each successbl build.\"
Functionality Included in Successive Builds

\~

\*

r

L

c

,

.

4

m ,

.

\+

a

3

m

3

N

N

n

N

m

N

\-

m

.

\*

O

r

m

L

c

Q

\-

.

O

\*

\*

\~

V

\~

n

N

n

U

n

Y

m

Build Number

\"Each bar on the graph is a build. The dark ones are completed. We have
divided our full-product acceptance test into pieces so that we have an
acceptance test for each build. We don\'t call the build complete until
it has passed its acceptance test without flaw.\" Mr-Tompkins put his
finger on the bar for Build 24. \"So, when Build 24 passes its test,
you\'ll know you\'re 46 percent of the way home.\" 283

\"Right. We\'re integrating builds at a present rate of about one every
two or three days.\" She stepped to the right side of the graph. \"So,
now you know how we can be so confident that we\'ll be done by the last
week in June. We\'re getting constant status information from the
product itself. That\'s what each successful build is, the voice of the
product announcing just how far along it is toward completion.\" Mr. T.
looked sadly at the date under her finger. He still would have liked to
have a last laugh on Belok by bringing one project home by June first.
\"No chance of speeding that up a bit? I mean . . . not that I\'m
complaining.. . .This project is proceeding admirably. It\'s just that .
. .\" She smiled. \"I know what you\'re thinking,Webster. June first,
right? It\'s still on my mind sometimes, too. Well, I don\'t see how we
could, fi-ankly. We have become very efficient at proving out the
builds, so we could up the rate a bit, but our limiting factor is
production time. Here, look.\" She pointed him toward another display on
the war room wall. \"This is how the time is spent on each module,
getting it ready to be incorporated in its build: coding time,
inspection time, unit test, documentation, et cetera.\" \"Nothing there
you could subtract?\" She glanced at the table again. \"Nothing I can
see. The most time-consuming part is inspection. We inspect each and
every module as soon as it\'s coded. That takes three people and usually
lasts an hour. We don\'t know what we can subtract fi-om the process,
but one thing we know that we can\'t subtract is inspection.\" There was
somethng about the way she phrased this that jarred him.Take your eye
off what you don\'t know, he told himself, and focus on what you do
know. It\'s not what you don\'t know that kills you but what you know
that isn\'t so. \"How do we know that we can\'t eluninate
inspection?\"he asked.

\"I think that has been the entire lesson of the last ten years,
Webster. Inspections are the cheapest way to eliminate defects. If you
don\'t eliminate them in inspections, you just have to take them out in
testing. And that costs you more than what you\'d save by eliminating
code inspections.\" Aristotle Kenoros happened by and joined the
conversation. \"Yup. That\'s what the evidence says,\" he chimed in.
\"Cheapest way to assure a quality product is code inspections.\" \"And
we know we\'re getting a quality product. Look at this.\" She pointed
proudly to a huge red display on the far wall that read \"14 straight!\"
\"Fourteen straight whats?\"Mr. Tompkins asked her. \"Fourteen straight
inspections without a single defect detected.\" She looked extremely
pleased. \"That is impressive,\" Mr. Tompkins allowed. \"I guess,
though, that we could have dispensed with those fourteen inspections and
saved some forty-two person-hours and not hurt quality one whit, since
they didn\'t find any defects.\" Molly looked disappointed in him. \"I
think you miss the point,Webster. It\'s because of code inspections that
we\'re getting such high quality.\" \"Not because of those last
fourteen, however. Those we could have done without.\" \"Well, . . . the
statistics on net benefit of inspections are pretty impressive, still.
I\'m not at all sure . . . \"Kill them,\" Mr.Tompkins said. He was
suddenly excited. \"Huh?\" \"Kill the inspections. Stop all code
inspections.\" \"Wait a minute,\" she wailed. \"We can\'t do that.
Aristotle, tell him. Tell him what you told us about the cost of
removing defects in inspection. Tell him he\'s off the wall.\" Kenoros
made a strange face. \"Off the wall, yes. But wrong, no. I hadn\'t
thought of it till you brought it up, Web99

THE DEADLINE

ster, but if the inspections aren\'t detecting defects, we can\'t
justi\* them on the basis of reduced cost per defect.\" \"Unless
something has gone terribly wrong in the inspection process . . . \"It
hasn\'t,\" Molly answered him promptly. \"We checked. The modules that
sail through inspection without any defects are also sailing through
testing. There just aren\'t any defects to detect.\" \"Then the
inspection is useless and I say kill it.\" She looked again to Kenoros
for help. \"I don\'t know. . . .\" he began. Mr. Tompkins interrupted
him. \"Aristotle, the defects aren\'t there. There\'s a reason for that.
The original code production is going much more smoothly than we would
have expected.\" \"Mmrn.\" \"Remember that: you told me that defects,
when they occur, are not exactly in the module, but on the \'edge\' of
the module?\" \"Yes.\" \"They are interface flaws, most of them. So,
they are really design errors. It\'s crazy to do a design analysis when
you\'re looking at one piece of code. This is you speaking. You need to
do that when you\'re looking at a design. The reason the statistics are
so impressive on code inspections is that they are a slightly better way
than testing to remove these design defects. But you\'ve implemented a
still better way, the more formal design. And you\'ve already inspected
the design. I declare that all these modules have already been
inspected, not at code time, but at design time. And so, fhrther
inspection is superfluous.\" \"You may be right,\" Kenoros allowed. He
was beginning to convince himself. \"If you are right, it suggests that
the code 9\'

286

inspections that the rest of the world is so enamored over are just a
remedial design technique. If we do a proper and complete design before
coding, and we inspect the design, we shouldn\'t need code inspection. I
don\'t know if that\'s one hundred percent true or not, but I do know
one thing.\" \"What\'s that?\" \"We need to find out. We\'re not running
much of a Project Management Laboratory if we don\'t find the answer to
this one.\"

Mr. Tompkins was sitting at his desk, staring down baffled at an empty
journal page, when Lahksa showed up at his door. He looked up. \"Oh.
It\'s you, Lahksa.\" He blushed slightly, as he often did when she
stopped by. Then, with a glance down at the accusingly empty page, \"You
gave me this journal,\" he told her, \"all those months ago. You told me
to write something in it every day. Write whatever it was that I learned
that day. And I have, most days. But now I haven\'t written a thing in
it for weeks. Do you know why that is?\" \"No.\" She sat down on the
edge of his desk. \"Tell me.\" \"Because I don\'t know what I learned
from the Belok affair. If I had resolved it myself, somehow, I could
take a lesson &.om that. Whatever I did to get him off my back, I could
write that down as a lesson learned. But I didn\'t resolve it. You
did.\" \"And you can\'t write that down.\" \"No. It\'s too dumb. From my
point of view, you descended like a passing angel and solved my problem
for me. It was more or less a miracle. I can hardly write that. I can
hardly write, \'If you work for a jerk, wait for a miracle to occur.\"\'
\"What would you rather write?\"

\"Something that a person could do. Afier all, the world is fill of
people who have horrid forms of pathology above them on the org chart,
some as bad as Belok or worse. The lesson I\'d like to write down is
what they should do about that.\" \"Maybe there is nothing they can do,
Webster. There ofien isn\'t. Did you, honestly, have any hope of dealing
with the pathology of Belok by yourself?\" It hadn\'t come to me yet,
but maybe there was something I could have done.\" \"I don\'t think so.
I don\'t think you can \'cure\' pathology from beneath. I honestly
don\'t\'webster. I don\'t think there is any way to do that.\" He
sighed. \"Maybe you\'re right. Maybe there is no way.\" \"Maybe that\'s
your lesson learned.\" With that, she ruffled his hair affectionately
and left him to write his entry. 66

From Mr. Tompkins\' Journal: I

Pathological Politics (Again) o

You can\'t expect t o cure pathology from beneath.

o

Don\'t waste your time or jeopardize your position by trying.

o

Sometimes, your only option is t o bide your time, waiting for t h e
problem t o resolve itself, or for a good opportunity for you t o move
on.

o

Miracles may happen (but don\'t count on them).

O n May 24th, the Quickerstill B-Team delivered its product. On May
29th, Quickerstill-C delivered. On May 30th, PMill-C delivered. Mr.
Tompkins was exultant. \"Can you believe this, Belinda? We actually
pulled off three deliveries, all before Belok\'s idiotic date.\" \"Does
that mean it wasn\'t an idiotic date after all?\" \"Of course it was an
idiotic date,\" he bristled. \"It would have been a decent stretch goal
for our two smallest products, but as a planning date it was idiotic.
Belok had actually committed to the distribution chain for all six
products to begin shipping starting tomorrow. June first wasn\'t even a
sensible stretch goal for any of the larger projects. And, as a planning
date, it was idiotic for any of them.\" \"Whoa. Are you suggesting that
a project ought to have both a schedule and a goal? and that they might
even be different? That\'s rather radical of you, Webster.\" \"Well?
Doesn\'t that make sense? A good goal is right on the edge of possible.
So, it makes a lousy scheduling date. A

good schedule is likely to be met, so it doesn\'t make much of a goal.
Why shouldn\'t projects have both?\" \"Oh, I\'m not disagreeing. It\'s
just that you are hardly standing with the crowd on this one.\"
\"You\'re right. I\'m all alone. Maybe that\'s a sign that I\'m right.\"
O n June lst, word came that NNL was finally back. Mr. Tompkins was
summoned with some urgency to see him. The assistant who had made the
appointment seemed almost breathless with excitement. She didn\'t give
much away, but there was clearly something in the works. In his own
experience, excitement in the Head Office was usually a bad sign. Head
Office people tended to get excited when heads were rolling or work was
about to be canceled. He took the morning train to Korsach with some
trepidation. Oh, there really wasn\'t much anyone could do now to spoil
his sense of achievement for projects that had already come home. But he
was still mildly worried. As it was during Webster\'s first visit those
many months ago, NNL\'s office was again unlit but for the glow of his
monitor. Again, it took a moment to locate the man, lost in the huge
room. He was in a dark corner, Twinkie in hand. In mouth, actually.
\"Mordig,Tobkigs,\" he said around a mouthfbl of cake. \"Morning, Sir.
Welcome back.\" \"Wade a minig,\" Himself said. He swallowed and wiped
his mouth on a napkin. Then, he looked up at Tompkins with an enormous
grin. \"We did it,Tompkins! We pulled it of??\" \"The projects? Well,
yes, we did have a bit of. . .\" \"No, not the projects. Although they
certainly did help. Nice going, by the way. But no, that wasn\'t what I
was talking about. I was talking about the offering.\"

22 THE YEAR\'SHOTTEST IPO

\"Offering?\" \"We\'re going public, Tompkins. Morovia Inc. is going
public. The IPO is scheduled for next week. This is a major coup. The
underwriters say it\'s going to be the hottest IPO of the year.\" \"My
goodness. Morovia going public. I thrnk we\'re likely to be the world\'s
first publicly traded country.\" \"I hadn\'t thought of that, but you
may be right.\" \"Congratulations are in order, I guess. Well,
congratulations, Sir. I hope you make a bundle of money on the offering.
Another bundle, that is.\" \"Not just me,Tompkins. All of us. You, in
particular.\" \"Me?\" \"Yes. Don\'t you remember, you have got stock.
You own half a percent of the outstanding stock.\" \"I do?\" Mr.
Tompkins\' interest was suddenly piqued. \"Of course, you do. Fifty
thousand shares.\" \"Um, is there any estimate yet about what the
offering price will be?\" NNL was having trouble containing his glee.
\"Fourteen dollars! Can you believe it? They thought at first it would
be eleven, but the issue was so oversubscribed that they had to bump up
the price. It could go even higher by next week. And god-knows-what it
will open at. It\'s not crazy to think about twenty dollars or even
twenty-four by end of the first day.\" He put his head back and crowed.
\"We\'re rich!\" \"Um, you were always rich.\" \"Richer, then. Much
richer. Wow. Hooray for capitalism. I feel like Scrooge McDuck, just
about to start burrowing in his money.\" Mr.Tompkins, still in a bit of
a daze, did the arithmetic on his own holdings. At \$14 a share, he
would be worth . . .Wow.

And at \$24 . . . Hooray for capitalism, indeed. \"Well, this is
decidedly good news,\" he said, with as much restraint as he could
muster. \"Everybody is getting some of the action,\" NNL told him.
\"We\'re distributing small amounts of stock to all employees. And I\'ve
made a pool\' of some thirty thousand extra shares available to you to
distribute among those of your people whom you select . . .\" \"My
goodness. Well, I will certainly know where to place that,\" Mr.
Tompkins told him fervidly. He was thinking of Belinda, Gabriel,
Aristotle. . . . \"I thought you would.\" NNL\'s face was alive with the
ebb and flow of emotion. He would seem to have himself calmed down, and
then it would all erupt again. \"Hooooheeeeeeeee!\" he yelped. \"Yes.\"
NNL calmed himself abruptly. \"Oh, one slightly complicated thing,
Tompkins. The underwriters inform us that we have to terminate your
contract before the offering. That means you get paid off, but have no
fbrther obligation to us as of the offering date. Legal reasons,
apparently. Of course, the new management will be after you to sign on
for another contract. I don\'t doubt you can stick it to them. They\'re
all quite aware of the wonders you\'ve accomplished.\" That put a
slightly different light on matters. \"Hrnm,\" Mr. Tompkins began.
\"Well, I will certainly listen. You know, though, my work here really
is done. The rest of the projects are on track. I have no doubt they\'ll
come home in fine shape. The major data from our experiments is all
collected now, though we\'ll certainly be interested to observe
completion of the larger projects. I don\'t have to be boss, however, to
make sure the final data is recorded and published. That work

22

THEYEAR\'S HOTTEST IPO

is already under way.\" He paused for a moment to consider. \"I think I
might just move on.\" \"Oh, dear. The new directors will be distressed.
Any idea who should be your replacement?\" \"Melissa Alber,\" Tompkins
answered without hesitation. \"She is ripe for the job, talented, gutsy,
capable, charismatic. She is so right for my job that I\'ve begun to
feel that I was just in the way of her career. I would be delighted to
step aside and let her have it.\" \"Well, as I say, the directors will
be upset about losing you. But, what the hell? Melissa sounds like a
perfect replacement, and maybe you do need to move on. I\'m certainly
not going to spend the rest of my life here, either. I wish you well,
Tompkins, whatever you decide to do.\" \"Well, thank you. I\'m not at
all sure what it will be, but I\'m looking forward to it. How about
yourself, Sir? Any idea what you\'ll be taking on next?\" \"Mmph.\" A
cloud of annoyance came over NNL\'s boyish features. \"I had a lovely
idea, but it hasn\'t panned out.\" He shook his head in irritation. \"I
thought I\'d look around for another country to buy up, another
leveraged stock deal. I thought I\'d look for a situation similar to
Morovia, you know, an ex-East Bloc country now up for grabs, poor but
well-educated, eager to move more quickly into the developed world.\"
\"Bulgaria, perhaps?\"Mr. Tompkins offered. \"That\'s just what I
thought. No deal, though. Somebody else has already picked it up. Just
my luck. You invent a better mousetrap and somebody steals it fiom you
and cleans up big time.\" \"Oh, well, something else will turn up.\"
\"Any ideas?\" A moment of reflection. \"How about the U.S.?\" Mr. T.
suggested.

\"Ooooh.\" \"Of course, it\'s a bit more ambitious.\" \"Of course. But
still, who would do it if not myself?\" \"Who indeed?\"Tompkins echoed.
Himself probably could pull it off, given enough time. Tompkins started
to have second thoughts about his suggestion. Oh, dear. Maybe he should
have kept his mouth shut. Maybe a leveraged buyout of the United States
by NNL would not be the best thing for the country. Mr. Tompkins still
had patriotic feelings. \"Um, if you did acquire the U.S., you wouldn\'t
interfere, would you, with civil rights?\" \"Oh, goodness, no. I\'d only
run the business part.\" \"No interfering in government?\" \"Well, not
much anyway. I would have the right, wouldn\'t I, to make one tiny
change?\" \"Well, I suppose, if it were just one. What are you
thinking?\" \"I think I\'d move the Anti-Trust Division to Nome,
Alaska.\" \"Ah. Well, I expect the American people could live with
that.\" A pause. This was it, then. Mr. Tompkins had come abruptly to
the end of his time in Morovia. He\'d stay on a month or so to bring
Melissa up to speed, and then he\'d be gone. This interview was clearly
over. In a few moments, he\'d leave and probably would never see NNL
again. NNL was thinking the same thing. He stood and shoved his hand
awkwardly toward Mr. Tompkins. \"Here now. Thank you for what you\'ve
done,Tompkins,\" he said gruffly Mr.Tompkins stood to shake his hand
somberly. \"Thank you, Tompkins. . . . um, Webster. It was a job well
done.\"

.

22 THE YEAR\'S HOTTEST IPO

\"And thank you, Sir.\" \"Bill. Please call me Bill.\" \"Thank you,
Bill.\" As soon as Mr.Tompkins was back in his Aidrivoli office, there
was a telephone call from NNL. \"Webster, have you any idea where
What\'s-his-name is? You know, the greasy little man. My Minister of
Internal Affairs. I haven\'t seen him since I got back.\'\' \"Belok.\"
\"Yes, that\'s the guy. Belok.\" \"I hear he is on extended sick leave,
actually. He\'s been gone about four months.\" \"Oh. Really?\" There was
a silent moment. \"Well, that\'s a great loss, I guess. I mean, I think
I guess that.\" Mr-Tompkins kept his face a blank. \"We\'ve all done our
best to make do in Allair\'s absence.\" \"Yes, well, the little problem
I have is that I had sort of proposed to the new board that my Minister
of Internal Affairs would take over for me as CEO. And now I don\'t seem
to have a Minister of Internal Affairs. They\'re sure to notice. Damn.
I\'m feeling quite keen to be out of here, and on to some new adventure.
But, with nobody to pass the helm to . . .\" \"So, . . . could you
appoint a new Minister? What\'s the &n of having the title of Tyrant if
you don\'t get to do stutf?\" \"Are you asking for the job?\" \"No way.
I\'m off to spend my new-found wealth.\" \"Who, then?\" \"Um, let me
think. Your prior Minister of Internal Affairs was a bit of a hatchet
man. Does the new one have to be the same sort?\"

\"Actually, no. I\'d rather have someone more like me. You know:
brilliant, but sort of a nice fellow. Or a nice fellow and brilliant.
Something like that.\" \"Gabriel Markov.\" A half-second delay, while
the brilliant but nice fellow on the other end of the line considered.
\"You\'re good, Webster. That\'s an inspired suggestion. People love him
and he\'s as savvy as they come.\" \"And a natural leader.\" \"I\'ll do
it. Allair is out and Gabriel in. We\'ll let him be Minister of Internal
Affairs for a while-he can poke around the organization and fix whatever
needs furing. Then, when I\'m ready to take off, we\'ll make him CEO.
What do you think of that?\" \"Good choice.\" \"It is, rather, isn\'t
it. I\'ve got a natural flair for this sort of thing.\" Mr.T. was just
settling down to think of something to write in his journal when the
phone rang again. Mrs. Beerzig had left, so he picked it up himself. The
voice on the other end was one that he might have thought he\'d never
hear again. \"Tompkins. Look alive there. This is Minister Belok.\" The
phone connection was crystal clear. Did that mean that Belok was calhng
fi-om close by? Could he be back in his office in Korsach and about to
consolidate his crumbling position? Tompkins might have guessed just
that. But now he didn\'t have to guess where the call was coming fi-om:
A little white caller-ID box had just been installed beside his phone,
and it even worked on international calls. He looked down at its tiny
screen. The caller identity shown there was GENHERP CLINIC: OSIMEE, GA
(USA). Belok was still taking

22 THE YEAR\'S HOTTEST IPO

the treatment. The fact that he referred to himself as \'Minister,\'
meant that he hadn\'t heard about the changes that were in the works.
\"Hello, Allair. How are you?\" \"Cut the crap. Tompkins, I want you to
move everybody out ofAidrivoli-1, -5, -6, and -7. I\'m renting the
space. I\'ve got a terrific tenant. I\'ve arranged it all by phone this
morning.\" \"Gee, what will we do with all those people?\" \"What do I
care? Squeeze them into the other buildings. Tear down the interior
walls and build big bull pens. Fire a few of them; you\'ve got way too
many people anyway.\" \"Golly, I shouldn\'t think that would make
anybody too happy.\'\' A chuckle on the other end. \"I guess not. Well,
tough noogies. We\'re not running a popularity contest here. Every day
they use up all that space is costing me seven thousand two hundred
twenty-three dollars of lost rent. That\'s what I\'ll be getting fiom
the new tenants. So, get your people out of there by Friday.\" \"Let\'s
see, fourteen hundred people in our three remaining buildings. That\'s
going to work out to less than forty square feet per person.\"
\"Right.\" \"Less than in a prison.\" \"Right. And listen, don\'t move
out the furniture or the computers or anything. I\'m selling it all to
the new tenants.\" \"Oh, dear. This is upsetting news. What will my
people do?\'\' \"Have them share. They\'ve been living in the lap of
luxury for too damn long. I\'m turning over a new leaf: From now on,
this organization is going to become lean and mean. \" \"Oh, no.\"

\"Yes! I\'ve been reading about \'lean and mean\' in the business
press. It\'s sweeping the whole country. The whole goddamn U.S. It\'s
the new big thing: layoffs, salary cuts, tighter workspace, spartan
conditions.\" \"But I don\'t much want my organization to become \'lean
and mean,\'Allair. No, I don\'t think I want that at all. I think what I
want is quite the opposite: prosperous and caring.\'\' \"Don\'t jerk me
around,Tompkins!\" \"Yes, prosperous and caring. That\'s the thing. We
are a class operation, and we ought to look and feel like one.\" Belok
screeched into the phone. \"You are on thin ice, Tompkins. Don\'t take
me lightly. Just do as you\'re told.\'\' \"No, I don\'t think I will,
Allair. Tell your tenants to kiss off.\" A short silence. Then, the
voice on the other end of the line hlssed,\"Let me recall to you a few
facts, you dunderhead. You are powerless and afraid, and I am one mean
and dangerous man. You don\'t dare trifle with me. You haven\'t got the
guts.\" Mr.Tompkins looked at his watch. There was a lecture in fifteen
minutes at the Institute. If he left now, he could pass through the
newly blooming rose gardens on his way. Nothing lefi to do here but get
this time-waster out of his hair. Nothing lefi but the coup de grace:
\"Allair, if I am such a pushover and you are such a dangerous fellow,
how come I am sitting here on top of the world and you\'re stuck in a
clinic in Georgia with blisters on your pecker?\" There was a soft gasp
on the line. Tompkins didn\'t wait for any hrther response. He hung up
the phone and headed out into the pleasant Morovian afternoon, talung
hls journal with him.

22 THE YEAR\'S HOTTEST IPO

From Mr. Tompkins\'Journal:

Lean and Mean o

Leanand Mean isaformuladeveloped in failing companies by t h e people
responsible for the failure.

o

I t is the opposite of any organization\'s natural goal: t o be
prosperous and caring.

o

Whenever you hear t h e phrase \"lean and mean,\" replace i t with what
i t really connotes: failing and frightened.

M T o m p k i n s was dreaming. Tlus was to be his last night in
Morovia. The party that evening at the Residence had gone on forever,
with a huge, celebratory crowd present. Everyone was there. Frankly,
he\'d had too much to eat and far too much to drink. That was probably
the reason for this dream, in which he saw a swirl of smoke with a light
inside and something else there, too. It was a giant head. No body, just
a head. The face was slightly cherubic, but huge, and on top of the head
was an immense turban. The face glowed, alive, its eyes and features
animated, and out of its mouth came a deep, rumbling voice: \"I am
Yordini!\" it said, grandly. \"Yordini,\" Tompkins replied in shock.
\"TheYordini?\" \"TheYordini,\" the head confirmed. \"The fortune
teller?\" There was an angry thunder clap. \"Thefuturist, darnrnit!\"
\"That\'s what I meant.\" \"The GreatYordini.\" \"Gee.\"

\"You are one lucky fellow,Tompluns. You are to be given a glimpse into
the hture.\" \"Wow.\" \"Ask your questions and I will give you answers.
The hture is as clear to me as the past is to others.\" Tompkins thought
rapidly: There were so many things that he needed to know. He was
leaving a lot of loose ends. \"Tell me . . .\" he considered
briefly,\"tell me what will happen to the ATC project. Will Gulliver
Menendez and his people deliver the system on time for the Summer
Games?\" Yordini closed his eyes. A disconnected hand appeared and
rubbed his chin thoughtfully. \"Yes,\" he said at last. \"Not perfect
and not without operational problems, but they will make the date. There
will be some delays on incoming fights, but no crashes.\" \"Well,
that\'s a relief. Tell me what\'s going to happen to Belinda Binda? Will
she be okay? Will she be able to get back on track again?\" Again, the
closed eyes. \"Yes. In a manner of speaking.\" \"What does that mean?\"
\"She d have a career again, but it won\'t be one hundred percent
respectable.\" \"Oh, dear. What will she become?\" \"U.S. Senator fiom
the State of California.\" \"Oh. Well, I think that is a good thing for
her. And a good thing for the rest of us, as well.\" \"What else?\"
\"Allair Belok. What will happen to him?\" \"A life of great portent. He
will become comptroller of a public company, an investment banker, a
captain of industry, and finally, a special assistant in the White
House.\" \"And then?\"

\"Then to the Federal Prison at Danbury.\" \"Yes, I thought so.\" \"And
finally, he will find religion and have his own radio talk show.\" \"As
you would expect.\" \"What else?\" The head was beginning to rise slowly
and the smoke to swirl more heavily. \"Wait. Wait. What will happen to
the American software industry? Will all the jobs be lost to third-world
countries as some have feared?\" The head was almost gone now. And then
it was gone. All that was left behind was the disembodied voice. \"Read
my book on the subject,\" it said. The journal that had been his
companion for the whole adventure was open on h s desk before him. It
was turned to page 102, the first blank page. He would have liked to
make a final entry, but there was really nothing he could think of that
would sum up his Morovian experience. Maybe the journal in its entirety
was the summing up. He turned back one page to see what he\'d written in
what he now knew would be the last entry. It was one he\'d thought of
often but only committed to paper a few days ago.

fzadical Common Sense o

A project needs t o have both goals and estimates.

o

They should be different.

23

PASSING THROUGH RIGA ON THE WAY HOME

There was a knock at the door. Mrs. Beerzig stuck her head in.
\"Webster, would you have time for an interview? There is a gentleman
here fiom the press.\" \"Sure, why not?\"he said cheerfully. The man who
was ushered in by Mrs. Beerzig was not a stranger as Mr.Tompkins had
expected. It was Alonzo Davici, one of ex-General Markov\'s star
managers. \"Alonzo-well, this is a surprise.\" He shook Alonzo\'s big
hand. Alonzo had a walrus mustache and an amused glint in his eye.
\"This is a new role for you, I think. Journalist?\" \"I\'ve been
promoted. Perhaps you hadn\'t heard. I went to work for the Institute.
They made me editor-in-chief of the new journal we\'re publishing. It\'s
to be called Aidrivoli Sojware Magazine.\" \"Oh, yes. I had heard that.
Well, congratulations.\" \"Thank you. For our first issue, I thought
we\'d do a feature on none other than yourself, about your experience
here in Morovia.\" \"Why not? Why not, indeed? I\'d be delighted. Tell
me, what would you like to know? Ask away.\" \"Well, just any lessons
you might have learned in the long trip up to your recent success. I
mean, you seem to have done some things right along the way. What were
they?\" \"More important, I should think, is what were the things I did
wrong, and what did I learn from them?\" \"That was to be my next
question,\"Alonzo conceded. \"What did I do right and wrong, and what
did I learn?\" He thought for a moment. \"It\'s funny you should ask
that. It\'s a question I\'ve asked myself almost every day since I first
came here. I would ask myself that question each evening, and if
anything occurred to me, I would write it down.\"

Alonzo raised his eyebrows. \"I haven\'t been in the magazine business
very long, but I\'m already attuned to the possibility that something
the interviewee has written down could save the interviewer a lot of
time. I don\'t suppose you could give me a copy of what you\'ve
written?\" Mr. Tompkins looked down at his journal on the desk in front
of him. \"I\'ll do better than that. I\'ll give you the original. I
can\'t think of a better person to have it.\" He passed the journal
over. Alonzo took the book in surprise. \"Well . . .\" He opened it and
thumbed through a few pages. \"Why, this is just what we\'re looking
for. I suspect this is what managers have been looking for for years.
How many of these entries are there?\" \"One hundred and one,\"
Mr.Tompkins told him. \"And you\'re willing to give this up? I mean, we
couId have a copy made and get the original back to you.\" Mr. Tompkins
shook his head. \"No need, really. I hope the contents may be of some
use to you, and your readers. But the journal can be of no fixrther use
to me, ever. I can never imagine opening it again. I don\'t need to. I
carry those hundred and one principles everywhere I go. They\'re carved
directly into my hide.\" There was one more thing that wasn\'t resolved,
and apparently it wasn\'t going to be. He hadn\'t seen Lahksa since the
party last night. She hadn\'t turned up at the airport with all the
others to see him off and when he had called her, there had been no
answer. Not only was there not to be a discussion, as he had hoped, of
what might lie ahead for them; there wasn\'t even going to be a
good-bye.

He settled dejectedly into his seat in the corporate jet. Seafood was
already asleep on the seat beside him, knocked out by his pill. Mr.
Tompkins was just strapping himself in when the steward came back to
check. \"Well, then, Mr. Tompkins. Just relax now and have a good
flight. The next stop will be . . .\" \"Boston,\" Mr. Tompkins finished
for him. \"That\'s the second stop. We have one stop in between.\" \"Oh?
Where will that be?\" \"Riga, Latvia. I know, I know, it\'s off the
beaten track a bit. The truth is that not all countries will let us
enter their airspace, coming as we do from a state with no modern air
traffic control.\" \"Ah, but all that will change, my fiiend. By the
summer of 2000. Morovia is going to have a first-class air control
system. Take my word for it.\" \"I look forward to it. How about some
champagne, sir?\" Mr. Tompkins accepted a glass and tipped back its
contents. He was asleep before the plane even took off. There was a hand
pushing against his shoulder. \"Mr. Tompkins. Wake up, sir. We\'re in
Riga.\" Mr.T. looked up at the steward sleepily. \"We are?\" \"Yes, sir.
As we\'ll be here several hours, we\'ve engaged a local man with a car
to show you around.\" The steward promised to keep an eye on Seafood.
\"Oh. Well. That\'s nice, I guess. I\'ve never been to Latvia. Why
not?\" He stood up, stretching, and allowed himself to be guided down
the stairs to the tarmac where there was a taxi waiting for him.

\"No customs?\"he asked the driver. The man shook his head. Tompkins
looked around. The airport seemed to be in the middle of a wide,
pleasant meadow. There were palm trees beside the runway. \"Gee, I never
thought there would be palm trees here.\" The driver grunted. He opened
the door, and Mr.Tompkins got in. Within ten minutes, they were in the
outskirts of a pleasant city, mostly in sand colors and pastels. It did
not look at all like the kind of northern place he would have expected
Riga to be. Riga, he would have thought, would be . . .Then he knew, of
course, that this wasn\'t Riga after all. \"What is this city
called?\"he asked the taxi driver. The answer, when it came back, was
exactly what he\'d been expecting: \"Sofia.\" \"Ah.\" It was so obvious,
now that he thought about it. Whoever it was that now ran Bulgaria
wanted to have a little chat with Tompkins. They wanted to suggest that
he do the same thing for them that he\'d done for Morovia. This was to
be an employment interview. And, like the last one, it was to be an
interview with a certain troubling aspect about it: He would be offered
a job, but it wasn\'t at all clear that he could say no. Well, this
time, he told himself, he was going to say no. The cab pulled up to a
vast rococo palace. \"What is this?\" he asked. \"It was the ancient
seat of the King,\" the driver told him. \"It\'s here where the
Nation\'s Noble Leader now lives and rules fi-om.\" \"Bulgaria has its
own NNL?\" \"Yes,\" the man smiled. \"Bulgaria\'s NNL. We call him
BNNL.\"

Tompluns rolled his eyes. Oh, well. Might as well see what the fellow
had in mind. Get it over with. Two footmen in elaborate dress escorted
him through the palace. He followed them up a vast circular stairway
that formed an entry into a part of the palace that, judged by a glance
into its interior, was even more palatial than what he had passed
through already. Someone was waiting for him at the top of the stairs, a
small figure almost lost in the grandeur of the place. \"Lahksa!\"
\"Hullo,Webster.\" \"Lahksa. I thought . . . Oh, I should have known.
You\'re up to your old tricks again.\" She gave him the lopsided smile,
but didn\'t say anything. \"Well. 1\'11 listen to what you\'ve got to
say, but don\'t expect me to be so easy as last time.\" \"Thank
you,Webster. I\'m glad you\'re not angry.\" \"Not angry. It\'s just that
I had hoped . . .\" No need to go into that. \"So you are Bulgaria\'s
NNL. Well, I should have guessed. Himself told me that someone had
gotten in and arranged a buyout ahead of him. Who else but you? Well,
you\'ll probably make a fine BNNL. . . .\" \"But Webster, it isn\'t I
who bought Bulgaria.\" \"It isn\'t?\" \"No. How could I? Oh, I did come
away with a nice bit of stock fiom the IPO, I\'m not complaining. But it
would never have been enough to pull off this deal. No, I am not the new
owner here.\" \"Well, who is, then?\" \"You are,Webster.\" \"What?!?\"

\"You are the new owner, at least the majority owner. You are BNNL.\"
\"How could that be? Now, don\'t give me that grin of yours. How did you
do this?\" \"Your various holdings, your stock certificates, I\'m
afraid, were no match for my sneaky little fingers. I sort of picked
them up.\" \"You are incorrigible.\" \"Probably so.\" \"But I still
wouldn\'t have thought that my small number of shares would be enough to
buy a whole country.\" \"Well, we did add in Belinda\'s shares and those
of Aristotle, and my own as well. . . .\" He knew &om the prospectus
exactly how many shares each person had. \"That still doesn\'t seem like
enough. Sixty thousand shares &om the three of you, and then my own
fifiy thousand. . . .\" She looked at him, startled. \"You had
options,Webster.\" \"I did?\" \"Of course. Don\'t you remember? I handed
them over to you myself when you signed your contract.\" \"I . . . I
honestly never looked. They\'re probably still there where I put them in
my document box.\" \"I don\'t think so,\" Lahksa said, smirking. \"Oh.
How many options did I have, by the way?\" \"Three hundred thousand
shares. Worth about \$7.2 million at today\'s price.\" 66\~h.79 \"A bit
of leverage here and there, and voili. I learned the formula from
Himself. He was quite adroit at that sort of thing.\"

23

. PA

SSING THROUGH RIGA ON THE WAY HOME

Mr. Tompkins\' head was swimming. \"I don\'t know what to say\"
\"Belinda and Aristotle have signed on to help you get started. It looks
like we may be able to pinch a few key people from your old staff, all
without getting Melissa too upset. And I\'ve been tracking down those
four key managers you so respected back in New Jersey. I\'ll bet we\'ll
get at least two of them to come. The Morovia IPO has made such ventures
look pretty good.\" \"Well.. .\" \"Say you\'ll do it,Webster. Please do.
I\'d be so pleased.\" He stopped, staring at her. \"Now just wait a
minute.\" This time he was not going to capitulate without getting what
he really wanted. He put on his most severe expression. \"Tell me,
Lahksa, exactly what role you\'ve picked out for yourself.\" For the
first time that he had ever noticed, she looked unsure of herself. She
bit her lip. \"I . . .\" \"Tell me, Lahksa.\'\' She looked down at the
floor. \"I hadn\'t thought,\" she said softly. \"Well, then, I\'ll tell
you. I\'m offering a role to you. You\'ll take it-or I\'ll turn on my
heel and walk out of here.\" She still wouldn\'t look at him. \"What
role are you offering me,Webster?\" He waited a moment before telling
her, \"Co-NNL and wife.\" \"Oh, Webster. I thought you\'d never ask.\"
\"Well?\" \"I do. I will. I take it.\" \"Good.\" He looked around. \"So.
Where do we go &-om here?\"

\"The royal apartments,\" she said, nodding toward an ornate portal.
\"Through there.\" He lifted her into his arms and carried her across
the threshold.


